rights reserved. Draft of August 24, 2025.

CHAPTER

16 Text-to-Speech

 “Words mean more than what is set down on paper. It takes the human voice
 to infuse them with shades of deeper meaning.”
 Maya Angelou, I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings

 The task of mapping from text to speech is a task with an even longer history than
 speech to text. In Vienna in 1769, Wolfgang von Kempelen built for the Empress
 Maria Theresa the famous Mechanical Turk, a chess-playing automaton consisting
 of a wooden box filled with gears, behind which sat a robot mannequin who played
 chess by moving pieces with his mechanical arm. The Turk toured Europe and the
 Americas for decades, defeating Napoleon Bonaparte and even playing Charles Babbage. The Mechanical Turk might have been one of the early successes of artificial
 intelligence were it not for the fact that it was, alas, a hoax, powered by a human
 chess player hidden inside the box.
 What is less well known is that von Kempelen, an extraordinarily
 prolific inventor, also built between
 1769 and 1790 what was definitely
 not a hoax: the first full-sentence
 speech synthesizer, shown partially to
 the right. His device consisted of a
 bellows to simulate the lungs, a rubber mouthpiece and a nose aperture, a
 reed to simulate the vocal folds, various whistles for the fricatives, and a
 small auxiliary bellows to provide the puff of air for plosives. By moving levers
 with both hands to open and close apertures, and adjusting the flexible leather “vocal tract”, an operator could produce different consonants and vowels.
 More than two centuries later, we no longer build our synthesizers out of wood
 text-to-speech and leather, nor do we need human operators. The modern task of text-to-speech or
 TTS TTS, also called speech synthesis, is exactly the reverse of ASR; to map text:
 speech
 synthesis It’s time for lunch!
 to an acoustic waveform:

 TTS has a wide variety of applications. It is used in spoken language models
 that interact with people, for reading text out loud, for games, and to produce speech
 for sufferers of neurological disorders, like the late astrophysicist Steven Hawking
 after he lost the use of his voice because of ALS.
 In this chapter we introduce an algorithm for TTS that, like the ASR algorithms
 of the prior chapter, are trained on enormous amounts of speech datasets. We’ll also
 briefly touch on other speech applications.
 2 C HAPTER 16 • T EXT- TO -S PEECH

 The task of text-to-speech is to generate a speech waveform that corresponds to a
 desired text, using in a particular voice specified by the user.
 Historically TTS was done by collecting hundreds of hours of speech from a
 single talker in a lab and training a large system on it. The resulting TTS system only
 worked in one voice; if you wanted a second voice, you went back and collected data
 from a second talker.
 The modern method is instead to train a speaker-independent synthesizer on tens
 of thousands of hours of speech from thousands of talkers. To create speech in a new
 voice unseen in training, we use a very small amount of speech from the desired
 talker to guide the creation of the voice. So the input to a modern TTS system is a
 text prompt and perhaps 3 seconds of speech from the voice we’d like to generate
 LANGUAGE PROCESSING,
 zero-shotVOL.
 TTS 33, 2025
 the speech in. This TTS task is called zero-shot TTS because the desired voice may 705
 never have been seen in training.
 The way modern TTS systems address this task is to use language modeling, and

Language Models are Zero-Shot Text
 in particular conditional generation. The intuition is to take an enormous dataset of
 speech, and use an audio tokenizer based on an audio codec to induce discrete audio tokens from that speech that represent the speech. Then we can train a language

o Speech Synthesizers
 model whose vocabulary includes both speech tokens and text tokens.
 We train this language model to take as input two sequences, a text transcript
 and a small sample of speech from the desired talker, to tokenize both the text and
 the speech into discrete tokens, and then to conditionally generate discrete samples
Yu Wu , Ziqiang Zhang of the , Long
 speechZhou, Shujie
 corresponding Liu
 to the , Member,
 text string, voice. Zhuo Chen,
 IEEE,
 in the desired
 Wang, Jinyu Li , Fellow, IEEE, Lei He , Sheng Zhao, and Furu Wei text string and
 At inference time we prompt this language model with a tokenized
 a sample of the desired voice (tokenized by the codec into discrete audio tokens) and
 conditionally generate to produce the desired audio tokens. Then these tokens can
 be converted into a waveform.

 odeling approach for text
 we train a neural codec
 screte codes derived from
del, and regard TTS as a
 er than continuous signal
 he pre-training stage, we
 rs of English speech which
systems. VALL-E emerges
 e used to synthesize highsecond enrolled recording
eriment results show that
 state-of-the-art zero-shot
 ss and speaker similarity.
 rve the speaker’s emotion Figure 16.1 VALL-E architecture for personalized TTS (figure from Chen et al. (2025)).
mpt in synthesis. Fig. 1. The overview of VALL-E. Unlike the previous pipeline (e.g., text →
 mel-spectrogram
 Fig. 16.1 from → waveform),
 Chen the shows
 et al. (2025) pipeline
 theofintuition
 VALL-E forisone
 textsuch
 → discrete code
 TTS system,
 peech synthesis, speech
 VALL-E
 → waveform. VALL-E generates the discrete audio codec codes based
 called VALL-E. VALL-E is trained on 60K hours of English speech, from over 7000 on text
 odeling, pre-training, in- input and acoustic code prompt, corresponding
 unique talkers. Systems like VALL-E have 2 components: to the target content and the
 speaker’s voice.
 1. The audio tokenizer, generally based on an audio codec, a system we’ll de-
ON adaptation and speaker encoding methods, requiring additional
 matic breakthroughs in fine-tuning, complex pre-designed features, or heavy structure
velopment of neural net- engineering [6], [7], [8], [9].
 16.2 • U SING A CODEC TO LEARN DISCRETE AUDIO TOKENS 3

 scribe in the next section. Codecs have three parts: an encoder (that turns
 speech into embedding vectors), a quantizer (that turns the embeddings into
 discrete tokens) and decoders (that turns the discrete tokens back into speech).
 2. The 2-stage conditional language model that can generate audio tokens corresponding to the desired text. We’ll sketch this in Section 16.3.

 Modern TTS systems are based around converting the waveform into a sequence of
 discrete audio tokens. This idea of manipulating discrete audio tokens is also useful
 for other speech-enabled systems like spoken language models, which take text
 or speech input and can generate text or speech output to solve tasks like speechto-speech translation, diarization, or spoken question answering. Having discrete
 tokens means that we can make use of language model technology, since language
 models are specialized for sequences of discrete tokens. Audio tokenizers are thus
 an important component of the modern speech toolkit.
 codec The standard way to learn audio tokens is from a neural audio codec (the word
 is formed from coder/decoder). Historically a codec was a hardware device that
 digitized analog symbols. More generally we use the word to mean a mechanism
 for encoding analog speech signals into a digitized compressed representation that
 can be efficiently stored and sent. Codecs are still used for compression, but for TTS
 and also for spoken language models, we employ them for converting speech into
 discrete tokens.
 Of course the digital representation of speech we described in Chapter 14 is already discrete. For example 16 kHz speech stored in 16-bit format could be thought
 of as a series of 216 = 65,536 symbols, with 16,000 of those symbols per second of
 speech. But a system that generates 16,000 symbols per second makes the speech
 signal too long to be feasibly processed by a language model, especially one based
 on transformers with their inefficient quadratic attention. Instead we want symbols
 that represent longer chunks of speech, perhaps something on the order of a few
 hundred tokens a second.

 En r
 cod de
 er co
 De
 Quantization
 x zt qt,1 qt,2 … qt,N zqt x^
 c

 adapted from Mousavi et al. (2025). An input waveform x is encoded (generally using a series
 of downsampling convolution networks) into a series of embeddings zt . Each embedding is
 then passed through a quantizer to produce a series of quantized tokens qt . To regenerate the
 speech signal, the quantized tokens are re-mapped back to a vector zq t and then encoded (usually using a series of upsampling convolution networks) back to a waveform. We’ll discuss
 how the architecture is trained in Section 16.2.4.

 Fig. 16.2 adapted from Mousavi et al. (2025). shows the standard architecture
 of an audio tokenizer. Audio tokenizers take as input an audio waveform, and are
4 C HAPTER 16 • T EXT- TO -S PEECH

 trained to recreate the same audio waveform out, via an intermediate representation
 consisting of discrete tokens created by vector quantization.
 Audio tokenizers have three stages:
 1. an encoder maps the acoustic waveform, a series of T values x = x1 , x2 , ..., xT ,
 to a sequence of τ embeddings z = z1 , z2 , ..., zτ . τ is typically 100-1000 times
 smaller than T .
 2. a vector quantizer that takes each embedding zt corresponding to part of the
 waveform, and represents it by a sequence of discrete tokens each taken from
 one of the Nc codebooks, qt = qt,1 , qt,2 , ..., qt,Nc . The vector quantizer also
 sums the vector codewords from each codebook to create a quantizer output
 vector zq t .
 3. a decoder that generates a lossy reconstructed waveform span x̂ from the
 quantizer output vector zq t .
 Audio tokenizers are generally learned end-to-end, using loss functions that reward a tokenization that allows the system to reconstruct the input waveform.
 In the following subsections we’ll go through the components of one particular
 tokenizer, the E N C ODEC tokenizer of Défossez et al. (2023).

 16.2.1 The Encoder and Decoder for the E N C ODEC model

 Decoder
 Encoder

 Embeddings @ 75Hz Embeddings @ 75Hz
 … D D …

 Conv1D (k=7, n=D) Conv1DT (k=7, n=D)

 EncoderBlock (N, S) Residual Unit (N)
 L S T M L S T M
 DecoderBlock (N, S)
 EncoderBlock
 DecoderBlock

 (N=16C, S=8)
 Conv1D (N=16C, S=8)
 (K=2S, N=C, Stride=S)
 EncoderBlock Conv1D Conv1DT (K=2S, N=C)
 (N=8C, S=5) (K=3, N=C)
 DecoderBlock
 (N=8C, S=5)
 Residual Unit Residual Unit
 EncoderBlock Conv1D
 (K=3, N=C) DecoderBlock
 (N=4C, S=4) (N=4C, S=4)

 EncoderBlock DecoderBlock
 (N=2C, S=2) (N=2C, S=2)

 Conv1D (k=7, n=C) Conv1D (k=7, n=C)

 Waveform @ 24kHz Waveform @ 24kHz

Because the original signal was represented at 24kHz, this is a downsampling of 24000
 75 = 320 times. Between
the encoder and decoder is a quantization step producing a lossy embedding zq t . The goal of the decoder is to
take the lossy embedding zq t and upsample it, converting it back to a waveform.

 The encoder and decoder of the E N C ODEC model (Défossez et al., 2023) are
 sketched in Fig. 16.3. The goal of the encoder is to downsample a span of waveform
 at time t, which is at 24kHz—one second of speech has 24,000 real values—to an
 embedding representation zt at 75Hz—one second of audio is represented by 75
 16.2 • U SING A CODEC TO LEARN DISCRETE AUDIO TOKENS 5

 vectors, each of dimensionality D. For the purposes of this explanation, we’ll use
 D = 256.
 This downsampling is accomplished by having a series of encoder blocks that are
 made up of convolutional layers with strides larger than 1 that iteratively downsample the audio, as we discussed at the end of Section ??. The convolution blocks are
 sketched in Fig. 16.3, and include a long series of convolutions as well as residual
 units that add a convolution to the prior input.
 The output of the encoder is an embedding zt at time t, 75 of which are produced
 per second. This embedding is then quantized (as discussed in the next section),
 turning each embedding zt into a series of Nc discrete symbols qt = qt,1 , qt,2 , ..., qt,Nc ,
 and also turning the series of symbols into a new quantizer output vector zq t . Finally, the decoder takes the output embedding from the quantizer zq t and generates
 a waveform via a symmetric set of convnets that upsample the audio.
 In summary, a 24kHz waveform comes through, we encode/downsample it into
 a vector zt of dimensionality D = 256, quantize it into discrete symbols qt , turn it
 back into a vector zq t of dimensionality D = 256, and then decode/upsample that
 vector back into a waveform at 24kHz.

 16.2.2 Vector Quantization
 vector
quantization The goal of the vector quantization or VQ step is to turn a series of vectors into a
 VQ series of discrete symbols.
 Historically vector quantization (Gray, 1984) was used to compress a speech
 signal, to reduce the bit rate for transmission or storage. To compress a sequence
 of vector representations of speech, we turn each vector into an integer, an index
 representing a class or cluster. Then instead of transmitting a big vector of floating
 point numbers, we transmit that integer index. At the other end of the transmission,
 we reconstitute the vector from the index.
 For TTS and other modern speech applications we use vector quantization for a
 different reason: because VQ conveniently creates discrete tokens, and those fit well
 into the language modeling paradigm, since language models do well at predicting
 sequences of discrete tokens.
 In practice for the E N C ODEC model and other audio tokenizers, we use a powerful from of vector quantization called residual vector quantization that we’ll define
 in the following section. But it will be helpful to first see the basic VQ algorithm
 before we extend it.
 Vector quantization has a training phase and an inference phase. We already
 introduced the core of the basic VQ training algorithm when we described k-means
 clustering of vectors in Section ??, since k-means clustering is the most common
 algorithm used to implement VQ. To review, in VQ training, we run a big set of
 speech wavefiles through an encoder to generate N vectors, each one corresponding
 to some frame of speech. Then we cluster all these N vectors into k clusters; k is set
 by the designer as a parameter to the algorithm as the number of discrete symbols
 we want, generally with k << N. In the simplest VQ algorithm, we use the iterative
 k-means algorithm to learn the clusters. Recall from Section ?? that k-means is
 a two-step algorithm based on iteratively updating a set of k centroid vectors. A
 centroid centroid is the geometric center of a set of a points in n-dimensional space.
 The k-means algorithm for clustering starts by assigning a random vector to each
 cluster k. Then there are two iterative steps. In the assignment step, given a set of
 k current centroids and the entire dataset of vectors, each vector is assigned to the
 cluster whose codeword is the closest (by squared Euclidean distance). In the re-
6 C HAPTER 16 • T EXT- TO -S PEECH

 256-d vector
 Output:
 to be quantized
 Vector Quantizer discrete symbol
 0 1.2

 0.9
 Encoder 0.1 Similarity 3
 …

 -55

 0.2

 1 2 3 4 5 … 1024 Cluster #
 255 -9

 … 256-d codewords
 (vectors)

 Codebook

 The input is a span of speech encoded by the encoder into a vector of dimensionality D =
 256. This vector is compared with each codeword (cluster centroid) in the codebook. The
 codeword for cluster 3 is most similar, so the VQ outputs 3 as the discrete representation of
 this vector.

 estimation step, the codeword for each cluster is recomputed by recalculating a new
 mean vector. The result is that the clusters and their centroids slowly adjust to the
 training space. We iterate back and forth between these two steps until the algorithm
 converges.
 VQ can also be used as part of end-to-end training, as we will discuss below,
 in which case instead of iterative k-means, we instead recompute the means during
 minibatch training via online algorithms like exponential moving averages.
 At the end of clustering, the cluster index can be used as a discrete symbol. Each
 codeword cluster is also associated with a codeword, the vector which is the centroid of all
 the vectors in the cluster. We call the list of cluster ids (tokens) together with their
 codebook codeword the codebook, and we often call the cluster id the code.
 code In inference, when a new vector comes in, we compare it to each vector in the
 codebook. Whichever codeword is closest, we assign it to that codeword’s associated
 cluster. Fig. 16.4 shows an intuition of this inference step in the context of speech
 encoding:
 1. an input speech waveform is encoded into a vector v,
 2. this input vector v is compared to each of the 1024 possible codewords in the
 codebook,
 3. v is found to be most similar to codeword 3,
 4. and so the output of VQ is the discrete symbol 3 as a representation of v.
 As we will see below, for training the E N C ODEC model end-to-end we will need
 a way to turn this discrete symbol back into a waveform. For simple VQ we do
 that by directly using the codeword for that cluster, passing that codeword to the
 decoder for it to reconstruct the waveform. Of course the codeword vector won’t
 exactly match the original vector encoding of the input speech span, especially with
 only 1024 possible codewords, but the hope is that it’s at least close if our codebook
 is good, and the decoder will still produce reasonable speech. Nonetheless, more
 powerful methods are usually used, as we’ll see in the next section.
 16.2 • U SING A CODEC TO LEARN DISCRETE AUDIO TOKENS 7

 16.2.3 Residual Vector Quantization
 In practice, simple VQ doesn’t produce good enough reconstructions, at least not
 with codebook sizes of 1024. 1024 codeword vectors just isn’t enough to represent
 the wide variety of embeddings we get from encoding all possible speech waveforms. So what the E N C ODEC model (and many other audio tokenization methods)
residual vector
 quantization use instead is a more sophisticated variant called residual vector quantization, or
 RVQ RVQ. In residual vector quantization, we use multiple codebooks arranged in a kind
 of hierarchy.

Figure
 put 2: The neural
 embedding audio codec
 to produce modelsymbol
 a discrete revisit. Because
 and the RVQ is employed,
 corresponding the first quantizer
 codeword. We thenplays
 look
 the most important role in reconstruction, and the impact from others gradually decreases.
 at the residual, the difference between the encoder output embedding zt and the codeword
 chosen by VQ. We then take a second codebook and run VQ on this residual. We repeat the
 we can explicitly
 process until we control
 have 8 the content in speech synthesis. Another direction is to apply pre-training
 tokens.
 to the neural TTS. Chung et al. [2018] pre-trains speech decoder in TTS through autoregressive
 mel-spectrogram prediction. In Ao et al. [2022], the authors propose a unified-modal encoder-decoder
 The idea
 framework is verywhich
 SpeechT5, simple. We rununlabeled
 can leverage standardspeech
 VQ with a codebook
 and text just as
 data to pre-train all in Fig. 16.4
 components
 in the prior
 of TTS model.section.
 Tjandra etThen for an
 al. [2019] input unlabeled
 quantizes embedding zt we
 speech into take thetokens
 discrete codeword vector
 by a VQVAE
 model
 that is [van den Oord
 produced, it zq1and
 call2017],
 et al.,
 let’s fortrain
 the az model
 as with the token-to-speech
 quantified by codebook sequence.
 1, and They
 take the
 demonstrate that the pre-trained modelt only requires t a small amount of real data for fine-tuning. Bai
 difference between the two:
 et al. [2022] proposes mask and reconstruction on mel spectrogram and showing better performance
 on speech editing and synthesis. Previous TTS pre-training work leverages less than 1K hours of
 (1)
 data, whereas VALL-E is pre-trainedresidual
 with 60K = zt −ofzdata.
 hours q t Furthermore, VALL-E is the first (16.1)
 to
 use audio codec codes as intermediate representations, and emerge in-context learning capability in
 residual zero-shot
 This TTS. is the error in the VQ; the part of the original vector that the VQ
 residual
 didn’t capture. The residual is kind of a rounding error; it’s as if in VQ we ‘round’
 3 vector
 the Background: Speech
 to the nearest Quantization
 codeword, and that creates some error. So we then take that
 residual vector and pass it through another
 Since audio is typically stored as a sequence of 16-bit vector
 integerquantizer! That gives
 values, a generative modelusisarequired
 second
 codeword 16that represents the residual part of the vector. We then take the residual
 to output 2 = 65, 536 probabilities per timestep o synthesize the raw audio. In addition, the audio
 samplethe
 from ratesecond
 exceeding ten thousand
 codeword, leads
 and dotothis
 an extraordinarily
 again. The long totalsequence length,
 result is making it more
 8 codewords (the
 intractable for raw audio synthesis. To this end, speech quantization is required to compress integer
 original codeword and the 7 residuals).
 values and sequence length. µ-law transformation can quantize each timestep to 256 values and
 That means
 reconstruct for RVQ
 high-quality we represent
 raw audio. It is widelytheusedoriginal
 in speechspeech span
 generative by asuch
 models, sequence of 8
 as WaveNet
 [van den Oord
 discrete et al.,(instead
 symbols 2016], butofthe1 inference
 discrete speed
 symbolis still
 in slow
 basicsince
 VQ).the Fig.
 sequence
 16.5length
 shows is not
 the
 reduced. Recently, vector quantization is widely applied in self-supervised speech models for feature
 intuition.
 extraction, such as vq-wav2vec [Baevski et al., 2020a] and HuBERT [Hsu et al., 2021]. The following
 workWhat do we
 [Lakhotia do2021,
 et al., when Duwe want
 et al., 2022]toshows
 reconstruct
 the codesthe speech?
 from The method
 self-supervised models canusedalsoin
 Ereconstruct
 N C ODEC content,
 RVQand the inference
 is again simple: speedweis faster than 8WaveNet.
 take the codewordsHowever,
 andthe speaker
 add themidentity has
 together!
 been discarded and the reconstruction quality is low [Borsos et al., 2022]. AudioLM [Borsos et al.,
 The resulting vector
 2022] trains speech-to-speech z is then passed through the decoder to generate a
 q t language models on both k-means tokens from a self-supervised model waveform.
 and .acoustic tokens from a neural codec model, leading to high-quality speech-to-speech generation.
 In this paper, we follow AudioLM [Borsos et al., 2022] to leverage neural codec models to represent
 16.2.4 Training
 speech in discrete tokens. the
 To compress audio formodel
 E N C ODEC network of audio tokens
 transmission, codec models are able to
 encode waveform into discrete acoustic codes and reconstruct high-quality waveform even if the
 speaker
 The E NisCunseen
 ODEC in training.
 model Compared
 (like similartoaudio
 traditional audio codec
 tokenizer approaches,
 models) the neural-based
 is trained end to end.
 codec is significantly better at low bitrates, and we believe the quantized tokens contain sufficient
 The input isabout
 information a waveform,
 the speakeraand
 span of speech
 recording of perhaps
 conditions. 1 or to
 Compared 10other
 seconds extracted
 quantization from
 methods,
 athelonger original
 audio codec waveform.
 shows The
 the following desired output
 advantages: is theabundant
 1) It contains same waveform span, since
 speaker information and
 acoustic information, which could maintain speaker identity in reconstruction compared to HuBERT
 codes [Hsu et al., 2021]. 2) There is an off-the-shelf codec decoder to convert discrete tokens into a
 waveform, without the additional efforts on vocoder training like VQ-based methods that operated on
 spectrum [Du et al., 2022]. 3) It could reduce the length of time steps for efficiency to address the
 problem in µ-law transformation [van den Oord et al., 2016].

8 C HAPTER 16 • T EXT- TO -S PEECH

 the model is a kind of autoencoder that learns to map to itself. The model is trained
 to do this reconstruction on large speech datasets like Common Voice (Ardila et al.,
 2020) (over 30,000 hours of speech in 133 languages) as well as other audio data
 like Audio Set (Gemmeke et al., 2017) (1.7 million 10 sec excerpts from YouTube
 videos labeled from a large ontology including natural, animal, and machine sounds,
 music, and so on).

 En
 cod 𝓛 GAN de
 r
 er co
 De
 Quantization
 x zt qt,1 qt,2 … qt,N zqt x^

 𝓛 VQ
 c

 𝓛 reconstruction
 (2025). The audio tokenizer is trained with a weighted combination of various loss functions,
 summarized in the figure and described below.

 The E N C ODEC model, like most audio tokenizers, is trained with a number of
 reconstruction loss functions, as suggested in Fig. 16.6. The reconstruction loss Lreconstruction mealoss
 sures how similar the output waveform is to the input waveform, for example by the
 sum-squared difference between the original and reconstructed audio:

 T
 X
 Lreconstruction (x, x̂) = ||xt − x̂t ||2 (16.2)
 t=1

 Similarity can additionally be measured in the frequency domain, by comparing the
 original and reconstructed mel-spectrogram, again using sum-squared (L2) distance
 or L1 distance or some combination.
adversarial loss Another kind of loss is the adversarial loss LGAN . For this loss we train a
 generative adversarial network, a generator and a binary discriminator D, which
 is a classifier to distinguish between the true wavefile x and a generated one. We
 want to train the model to fool this discriminator, so the better the discriminator, the
 worse our reconstruction must be, and so we use the discriminator’s success as a loss
 function, We can also incorporate various features from the generator.
 Finally, we need a loss for the quantizer. This is because having a quantizer in
 the middle of end-to-end training causes problems in propagation of the gradient in
 the backward pass of training, because the quantization step is not differentiable.
 We deal with this problem in two ways. First, we ignore the quantization step in
 the backward pass. Instead we copy the gradients from the output of the quantizer
 (zq t ) back to the input of the quantizer (zt ), a method called the straight-through
 estimator (Van Den Oord et al., 2017).
 But then we need a method to make sure the code words in the vector quantizer
 step get updated during training. One method is to start these off using k-means
 clustering of the vectors zt to get an initial clustering. Then we can add to a loss
 component, LVQ , which will be a function of the difference between the encoder
 16.3 • VALL-E: G ENERATING AUDIO WITH 2- STAGE LM 9

 output vector zt and the reconstructed vector after the quantization zq t , i.e. the codeword, summed over all the Nc codebooks and residuals.
 Nc
 T X
 X (c)
 LVQ (x, x̂) = ||z(c) t − zq t || (16.3)
 t=1 c=1

 The total loss function can then just be a weighted sum of these losses:

 L(x, x̂) = λ1 Lreconstruction (x, x̂) + λ2 LGAN (x, x̂) + λ3 LVQ (x, x̂) (16.4)

 As we summarized in the introduction, the structure of TTS systems like VALL-E
 is to take as input a text to be synthesized and a sample of the voice to be used, and
 tokenize both, using BPE for the text and an audio codec for the speech. We then
 use a language model to conditionally generate discrete audio tokens corresponding
 to the text prompt, in the voice of the speech sample.

 Output code sequence …
 …
 Non-Autoregressive
 CT’+1,1 CT’+2,1 CT,1
 x C CT’+1,2
 CT’+1,3
 CT’+2,2
 CT’+2,3
 … CT,2
 CT,3

 Non-Autoregressive
 CT’+1,1
 CT’+2,1 CT,1
 x C
 …
 CT’+1,2 CT’+2,2 CT,2

 Non-Autoregressive
 x C CT’+1,1 CT’+2,1 … CT,1

 Autoregressive (AR) Transformer

 x C
 Text Audio Prompt

 stage for the autoregressive transformer and the first 3 of the 7 non-autoregressive transformers. The output sequence of discrete audio codes is generated in two stages. First the autoregressive LM generates all the codes for the first quantizer from left to right. Then the
 non-autoregressive model is called 7 times to generate the remaining codes conditioned on all
 the codes from the preceding quantizer, including conditioning on the codes to the right.

 Instead of doing this conditional generation with a single autoregressive language model, VALL-E does the conditional generation in a 2-stage process, using
 two distinct language models. This architectural choice is influenced by the hierarchical nature of the RVQ quantizer that generates the audio tokens. The output of the
 first RVQ quantizer is the most important token to the final speech, while the subsequent quantizers contribute less and less residual information to the final signal. So
 10 C HAPTER 16 • T EXT- TO -S PEECH

 the language model generates the acoustic codes in two stages. First, an autoregressive LM generates the first-quantizer codes for the entire output sequence, given the
 input text and enrolled audio. Then given those codes, a non-autoregressive LM is
 run 7 times, each time taking as input the output of the initial autoregressive codes
 and the prior non-autoregressive quantizer and thus generating the codes from the
 remaining quantizers one by one. Fig. 16.7 shows the intuition for the inference
 step.
 Now let’s see the architecture in a bit more detail. For training, we are given
 an audio sample y and its tokenized text transcription x = [x0 , x1 , . . . , xL ]. We use a
 pretrained E N C ODEC to convert y into a code matrix C. Let T be the number of
 downsampled vectors output by E N C ODEC, with 8 codes per vector. Then we can
 represent the encoder output as
 CT ×8 = E N C ODEC(y) (16.5)

 Here C is a two-dimensional acoustic code matrix that has T × 8 entries, where the
 columns represent time and the rows represent different quantizers. That is, the row
 vector ct,: of the matrix contains the 8 codes for the t-th frame, and the column vector
 c:, j contains the code sequence from the j-th vector quantizer where j ∈ [1, ..., 8].
 Given the text x and audio C, we train the TTS as a conditional code language
 model to maximize the likelihood of C conditioned on x:
 L = − log p(C|x)
 T
 Y
 = − log p(c<t,: , x) (16.6)
CHEN et al.: NEURAL CODEC LANGUAGE MODELS ARE ZERO-SHOT TEXT TO SPEECH
 t=0 SYNTHESIZERS 709

 Figure
Fig. 3. Training overview 16.8 We
 of VALL-E. Training
 regard TTSprocedure for VALL-E.
 as a conditional Given
 codec language the text
 modeling task. prompt, theVALL-E
 We structure autoregressive
 as two conditional codec language
models in a hierarchicaltransformer
 structure. The is
 ARfirst trained
 model is usedtotogenerate eachcode
 generate each code of the
 of the first first-quantizer
 code sequence incode sequence, manner,
 an autoregressive autore-while the NAR model is
used to generate each remaining code sequence based on the previous code sequences in a non-autoregressive manner.
 gressively The the non-autoregressive transformer generates the rest of the codes. Figure from
 Chen et al. (2025).

 Fig.AR
B. Hierarchical Structure: 16.8 andshows the intuition. On the left,
 NAR Model we have an audio
 simultaneously, sample the
 thus reducing andtime
 its trancomplexity from O(T )
 scription, and both are tokenized. Then
 As introduced in Section III, the codec codes derived from the wetoappend
 O(1). an [ EOS ] and [ BOS ] token to x
 and anwith
neural audio codec model [ EOS ] token
 RVQ to the
 exhibit twoend
 keyof C and train the autoregressive transformer to predict
 properties:
(1) A single speechthe acoustic
 sample tokens,into
 is encoded starting c0,1 ,sewithcode
 multiple untilC.[ EOS
 Training:
 ], and Conditional Codec Language Modeling
 then the non-autoregressive
quences with multiple transformers
 quantizers in to the
 fill audio
 in thecodec
 other model.
 tokens.(2) As depicted in Fig. 3, VALL-E is trained using the condiis presentinference,
A hierarchical structure During where the code we are given afrom
 sequence text sequence to belanguage
 tional codec spoken as y0 , an enwell as method.
 modeling It is noteworthy that
 rolledmost
the first quantizer covers speech
 of thesample
 acoustic from some unseen
 information, whilespeaker, for which
 the training we have requires
 of VALL-E the transcription
 only simple utterance-wise
subsequent code sequences contain the residual acoustic infor- audio-transcription pair data, and no complex data such as
mation from their predecessors, serving to refine and augment force-alignment information or additional audio clips of the
the acoustic details. same speaker for reference. This greatly simplifies the process of
 Inspired by these properties, we design VALL-E as two collecting and processing training data, facilitating scalability.
conditional codec language models in a hierarchical structure: Specifically, for each audio and corresponding transcription
an Autoregressive (AR) codec language model and a Non- in the training dataset, we initially utilize the audio codec
 16.4 • TTS E VALUATION 11

 transcript(y0 ). We first run the codec to get an acoustic code matrix for y0 , which will
 be CP = C:T 0 ,: = [c0,: , c1,: , . . . cT 0 ,: :]. Next we concatenate the transcription of y0 to
 the text sequence to be spoken to create the total input text x, which we pass through
 a text tokenizer. At this stage we thus have a tokenized text x and a tokenized audio
 prompt CP .
 Then we generate CT = C>T 0 ,: = [cT 0 +1,: , . . . cT,: ] conditioned on the text sequence x and the prompt CP :
 CT = argmax p(CT |CP , x)
 CT
 T
 Y
 = argmax p(ct,: |c<t,: , x) (16.7)
 CT t=T 0 +1
 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUDIO,
 Then the generated SPEECH
 tokens ANDbeLANGUAGE
 CT can converted byPROCESSING, VOL.
 the E N C ODEC 33, 2025
 decoder into
 a waveform. Fig. 16.9 shows the intuition.

 The AR model is fed with
nding code sequence with
d at the end using a code
attention mask strategy, the
y attend to the text sequence
 demonstrated in the lower

ptimized by minimizing the
 code sequence c:,1 condiθAR ) (10)

 |c<t,1 , x; θAR ). (11)
Fig. 4. Inference overview of VALL-E. We perform zero-shot TTS via promptscript for the 3 seconds of enrolled speech is first prepended to the text to be generated, and
Language Modeling: Given ing
 both the conditional
 the codec
 speech and text languageNext
 are tokenized. model.
 the autoregressive transformer starts generating
by the AR model, the NAR the first codes ct 0 +1,1 conditioned on the transcript and acoustic prompt.

 remaining code sequence See Chen et al. (2025) for more details on the transformer components and other
 ence x and the preceding Overall,
 details the NAR model is optimized by minimizing the
 of training.
 toregressive manner, where negative log likelihood of each j-th target code sequence c>T ′ ,j
 conditioned on the text sequence x, all the code sequences of
 e sequences of the prompt the acoustic condition C:T ′ ,: and the preceding j − 1 target code
e speaker information of the sequences c>T ′ ,<j .
 TTS systems are evaluated by humans, by playing an utterance to listeners and askitly split the code matrix MOSC ingLthem
 NARto= give mean
 −alog p(Copinion score
 >T ′ ,>1 |x,(MOS),
 C<T ′a,:rating
 , c>Tof′ ,1how (15)
 good)the synthesized
 ; θNAR
 d target code matrix C>T ′ ,: utterances are, usually on a scale from 1–5. We can then compare systems by com-
The model is then optimized paring their MOS$ scores
 8 on the same sentences (using, e.g., paired t-tests to test for
 significant=
 differences).
 − log p(c>T ′ ,j |x, C<T ′ ,: , C>T ′ ,<j ; θNAR ). (16)
 e c>T ′ ,j conditioned on the
 j=2
 es in the acoustic condition
nces in the target code matrix In practice, to optimize computational efficiency during training,
ner. we do not calculate the training loss by iterating over all values of
t of Fig. 3, we first obtain the j and aggregating the corresponding losses. Instead, during each
12 C HAPTER 16 • T EXT- TO -S PEECH

 If we are comparing exactly two systems (perhaps to see if a particular change
 CMOS actually improved the system), we can also compare using CMOS (Comparative
 MOS). where users give their preference on which of the two utterances is better.
 CMOS scores range from -3 (the system is much worse than the reference) to 3 (the
 system is better than the reference) Here we play the same sentence synthesized by
 two different systems. The human listeners choose which of the two utterances they
 like better. We do this for say 50 sentences (presented in random order) and compare
 the number of sentences preferred for each system.
 Although speech synthesis systems are best evaluated by human listeners, some
 automatic metrics can be used to add more information. For example we can run the
 output through an ASR system and compute the word error rate (WER) to see how
 robust the synthesized output is. Or for measuring how well the voice output of the
 TTS system matches the enrolled voice, we can treat the task as if it were speaker
 verification, passing the two voices to a speaker verification system and using the
 resulting score as a similarity score.

 There are a wide variety of other speech-related tasks.
 speaker Speaker diarization is the task of determining ‘who spoke when’ in a long
 diarization
 multi-speaker audio recording, marking the start and end of each speaker’s turns in
 the interaction. This can be useful for transcribing meetings, classroom speech, or
 medical interactions. Often diarization systems use voice activity detection (VAD) to
 find segments of continuous speech, extract speaker embedding vectors, and cluster
 the vectors to group together segments likely from the same speaker. More recent
 work is investigating end-to-end algorithms to map directly from input speech to a
 sequence of speaker labels for each frame.
 speaker
 recognition Speaker recognition, is the task of identifying a speaker. We generally distinspeaker guish the subtasks of speaker verification, where we make a binary decision (is
 verification
 this speaker X or not?), such as for security when accessing personal information
 over the telephone, and speaker identification, where we make a one of N decision
 trying to match a speaker’s voice against a database of many speakers.
 language In the task of language identification, we are given a wavefile and must identify
 identification
 which language is being spoken; this is an important part of building multilingual
 models, creating datasets, and even plays a role in online systems.
 wake word The task of wake word detection is to detect a word or short phrase, usually in
 order to wake up a voice-enable assistant like Alexa, Siri, or the Google Assistant.
 The goal with wake words is build the detection into small devices at the computing
 edge, to maintain privacy by transmitting the least amount of user speech to a cloudbased server. Thus wake word detectors need to be fast, small footprint software that
 can fit into embedded devices. Wake word detectors usually use the same frontend
 feature extraction we saw for ASR, often followed by a whole-word classifier.

 TBD
 16.7 • S UMMARY 13

 This chapter introduced the fundamental algorithms of text-to-speech (TTS).
 • A common modern algorithm for TTS is to use conditional generation with a
 language model over audio tokens learned by a codec model.
 • A neural audio codec, short for coder/decoder, is a system that encodes analog speech signals into a digitized, discrete compressed representation for
 compression.
 • The discrete symbols that a codec produces as its compressed representation
 can be used as discrete codes for language modeling.
 • A codec includes an encoder that uses convnets to downsample speech into
 a downsampled embedding, a quantizer that converts the embedding into a
 series of discrete tokens, and a decoder that uses convnets to upsample the
 tokens/embedding back into a lossy reconstructed waveform.
 • Vector Quantization (VQ) is a method for turning a series of vectors into a
 series of discrete symbols. This can be done by using k-means clustering, and
 then creating a codebook in which each code is represented by a vector at the
 centroid of each cluster, called a codeword. Input vector can be assigned the
 nearest codeword cluster.
 • Residual Vector Quantization (RVQ) is a hierarchical version of vector
 quantization that produces multiple codes for an input vector by first quantizing a vector into a codebook, and then quantizing the residual (the difference
 between the codeword and the input vector) and then iterating.
 • TTS systems like VALL-E take a text to be synthesized and a sample of the
 voice to be used, tokenize with BPE (text) and an audio codec (speech) and
 then use an LM to conditionally generate discrete audio tokens corresponding
 to the text prompt, in the voice of the speech sample.
 • TTS is evaluated by playing a sentence to human listeners and having them
 give a mean opinion score (MOS).

Historical Notes
 As we noted at the beginning of the chapter, speech synthesis is one of the earliest
 fields of speech and language processing. The 18th century saw a number of physical
 models of the articulation process, including the von Kempelen model mentioned
 above, as well as the 1773 vowel model of Kratzenstein in Copenhagen using organ
 pipes.
 The early 1950s saw the development of three early paradigms of waveform
 synthesis: formant synthesis, articulatory synthesis, and concatenative synthesis.
 Formant synthesizers originally were inspired by attempts to mimic human
 speech by generating artificial spectrograms. The Haskins Laboratories Pattern
 Playback Machine generated a sound wave by painting spectrogram patterns on a
 moving transparent belt and using reflectance to filter the harmonics of a waveform (Cooper et al., 1951); other very early formant synthesizers include those of
 Lawrence (1953) and Fant (1951). Perhaps the most well-known of the formant
 synthesizers were the Klatt formant synthesizer and its successor systems, including the MITalk system (Allen et al., 1987) and the Klattalk software used in Digital
 Equipment Corporation’s DECtalk (Klatt, 1982). See Klatt (1975) for details.
14 C HAPTER 16 • T EXT- TO -S PEECH

 A second early paradigm, concatenative synthesis, seems to have been first proposed by Harris (1953) at Bell Laboratories; he literally spliced together pieces of
 magnetic tape corresponding to phones. Soon afterwards, Peterson et al. (1958) proposed a theoretical model based on diphones, including a database with multiple
 copies of each diphone with differing prosody, each labeled with prosodic features
 including F0, stress, and duration, and the use of join costs based on F0 and formant
 distance between neighboring units. But such diphone synthesis models were not
 actually implemented until decades later (Dixon and Maxey 1968, Olive 1977). The
 1980s and 1990s saw the invention of unit selection synthesis, based on larger units
 of non-uniform length and the use of a target cost, (Sagisaka 1988, Sagisaka et al.
 1992, Hunt and Black 1996, Black and Taylor 1994, Syrdal et al. 2000).
 A third paradigm, articulatory synthesizers attempt to synthesize speech by
 modeling the physics of the vocal tract as an open tube. Representative models
 include Stevens et al. (1953), Flanagan et al. (1975), and Fant (1986). See Klatt
 (1975) and Flanagan (1972) for more details.
 Most early TTS systems used phonemes as input; development of the text analysis components of TTS came somewhat later, drawing on NLP. Indeed the first
 true text-to-speech system seems to have been the system of Umeda and Teranishi
 (Umeda et al. 1968, Teranishi and Umeda 1968, Umeda 1976), which included a
 parser that assigned prosodic boundaries, as well as accent and stress.
 History of codecs and modern history of neural TTS TBD.

Exercises
 Exercises 15

Allen, J., M. S. Hunnicut, and D. H. Klatt. 1987. From Text Olive, J. P. 1977. Rule synthesis of speech from dyadic units.
 to Speech: The MITalk system. Cambridge University ICASSP77.
 Press. Peterson, G. E., W. S.-Y. Wang, and E. Sivertsen. 1958.
Ardila, R., M. Branson, K. Davis, M. Kohler, J. Meyer, Segmentation techniques in speech synthesis. JASA,
 M. Henretty, R. Morais, L. Saunders, F. Tyers, and G. We- 30(8):739–742.
 ber. 2020. Common voice: A massively-multilingual Sagisaka, Y. 1988. Speech synthesis by rule using an optimal
 speech corpus. LREC. selection of non-uniform synthesis units. ICASSP.
Black, A. W. and P. Taylor. 1994. CHATR: A generic speech Sagisaka, Y., N. Kaiki, N. Iwahashi, and K. Mimura. 1992.
 synthesis system. COLING. Atr – ν-talk speech synthesis system. ICSLP.
Chen, S., C. Wang, Y. Wu, Z. Zhang, L. Zhou, S. Liu, Stevens, K. N., S. Kasowski, and G. M. Fant. 1953. An elec-
Z. Chen, Y. Liu, H. Wang, J. Li, L. He, S. Zhao, and trical analog of the vocal tract. JASA, 25(4):734–742.
 F. Wei. 2025. Neural codec language models are zeroshot text to speech synthesizers. IEEE Trans. on TASLP, Syrdal, A. K., C. W. Wightman, A. Conkie, Y. Stylianou,
 33:705–718. M. Beutnagel, J. Schroeter, V. Strom, and K.-S. Lee.
 2000. Corpus-based techniques in the AT&T NEXTGEN
Cooper, F. S., A. M. Liberman, and J. M. Borst. 1951. The
 synthesis system. ICSLP.
 interconversion of audible and visible patterns as a basis
 for research in the perception of speech. Proceedings of Teranishi, R. and N. Umeda. 1968. Use of pronouncing dicthe National Academy of Sciences, 37(5):318–325. tionary in speech synthesis experiments. 6th International
 Congress on Acoustics.
Défossez, A., J. Copet, G. Synnaeve, and Y. Adi. 2023. High
 fidelity neural audio compression. TMLR. Umeda, N. 1976. Linguistic rules for text-to-speech synthesis. Proceedings of the IEEE, 64(4):443–451.
Dixon, N. and H. Maxey. 1968. Terminal analog synthesis of
 continuous speech using the diphone method of segment Umeda, N., E. Matui, T. Suzuki, and H. Omura. 1968. Synassembly. IEEE Transactions on Audio and Electroacous- thesis of fairy tale using an analog vocal tract. 6th Intertics, 16(1):40–50. national Congress on Acoustics.
Fant, G. M. 1951. Speech communication research. Ing. Van Den Oord, A., O. Vinyals, and K. Kavukcuoglu. 2017.
 Vetenskaps Akad. Stockholm, Sweden, 24:331–337. Neural discrete representation learning. NeurIPS.
Fant, G. M. 1986. Glottal flow: Models and interaction.
 Journal of Phonetics, 14:393–399.
Flanagan, J. L. 1972. Speech Analysis, Synthesis, and Perception. Springer.
Flanagan, J. L., K. Ishizaka, and K. L. Shipley. 1975. Synthesis of speech from a dynamic model of the vocal
 cords and vocal tract. The Bell System Technical Journal, 54(3):485–506.
Gemmeke, J. F., D. P. Ellis, D. Freedman, A. Jansen,
 W. Lawrence, R. C. Moore, M. Plakal, and M. Ritter.
 2017. Audio Set: An ontology and human-labeled dataset
 for audio events. ICASSP.
Gray, R. M. 1984. Vector quantization. IEEE Transactions
 on ASSP, ASSP-1(2):4–29.
Harris, C. M. 1953. A study of the building blocks in speech.
 JASA, 25(5):962–969.
Hunt, A. J. and A. W. Black. 1996. Unit selection in a concatenative speech synthesis system using a large speech
 database. ICASSP.
Klatt, D. H. 1975. Voice onset time, friction, and aspiration
 in word-initial consonant clusters. Journal of Speech and
 Hearing Research, 18:686–706.
Klatt, D. H. 1982. The Klattalk text-to-speech conversion
 system. ICASSP.
Lawrence, W. 1953. The synthesis of speech from signals
 which have a low information rate. In W. Jackson, ed.,
 Communication Theory, 460–469. Butterworth.
Mousavi, P., G. Maimon, A. Moumen, D. Petermann,
 J. Shi, H. Wu, H. Yang, A. Kuznetsova, A. Ploujnikov,
 R. Marxer, B. Ramabhadran, B. Elizalde, L. Lugosch,
 J. Li, C. Subakan, P. Woodland, M. Kim, H. yi Lee,
 S. Watanabe, Y. Adi, and M. Ravanelli. 2025. Discrete
 audio tokens: More than a survey! ArXiv preprint.
