rights reserved. Draft of August 24, 2025.

CHAPTER

 Embeddings
5 荃者所以在鱼，得鱼而忘荃 Nets are for fish;
 Once you get the fish, you can forget the net.
 言者所以在意，得意而忘言 Words are for meaning;
 Once you get the meaning, you can forget the words
 庄子(Zhuangzi), Chapter 26

 The asphalt that Los Angeles is famous for occurs mainly on its freeways. But
 in the middle of the city is another patch of asphalt, the La Brea tar pits, and this
 asphalt preserves millions of fossil bones from the last of the Ice Ages of the Pleistocene Epoch. One of these fossils is the Smilodon, or saber-toothed tiger, instantly
 recognizable by its long canines. Five million years ago or so, a completely different
 saber-tooth tiger called Thylacosmilus lived
 in Argentina and other parts of South America. Thylacosmilus was a marsupial whereas
 Smilodon was a placental mammal, but Thylacosmilus had the same long upper canines
 and, like Smilodon, had a protective bone
 flange on the lower jaw. The similarity of
 these two mammals is one of many examples
 of parallel or convergent evolution, in which particular contexts or environments
 lead to the evolution of very similar structures in different species (Gould, 1980).
 The role of context is also important in the similarity of a less biological kind
 of organism: the word. Words that occur in similar contexts tend to have similar
 meanings. This link between similarity in how words are distributed and similarity
 distributional
 hypothesis in what they mean is called the distributional hypothesis. The hypothesis was
 first formulated in the 1950s by linguists like Joos (1950), Harris (1954), and Firth
 (1957), who noticed that words which are synonyms (like oculist and eye-doctor)
 tended to occur in the same environment (e.g., near words like eye or examined)
 with the amount of meaning difference between two words “corresponding roughly
 to the amount of difference in their environments” (Harris, 1954, p. 157).
 embeddings In this chapter we introduce embeddings, vector representations of the meaning
 of words that are learned directly from word distributions in texts. Embeddings lie
 at the heart of large language models and other modern applications. The static embeddings we introduce here underlie the more powerful dynamic or contextualized
 embeddings like BERT that we will see in Chapter 10 and Chapter 8.
 The linguistic field that studies embeddings and their meanings is called vector
 vector semantics. Embeddings are also the first example in this book of representation
 semantics
 representation
 learning learning, automatically learning useful representations of the input text. Finding
 such self-supervised ways to learn representations of language, instead of creating representations by hand via feature engineering, is an important principle of
 modern NLP (Bengio et al., 2013).
2 C HAPTER 5 • E MBEDDINGS

 Let’s begin by introducing some basic principles of word meaning. How should
 we represent the meaning of a word? In the n-gram models of Chapter 3, and in
 classical NLP applications, our only representation of a word is as a string of letters,
 or an index in a vocabulary list. This representation is not that different from a
 tradition in philosophy, perhaps you’ve seen it in introductory logic classes, in which
 the meaning of words is represented by just spelling the word with small capital
 letters; representing the meaning of “dog” as DOG, and “cat” as CAT, or by using an
 apostrophe (DOG ’).
 Representing the meaning of a word by capitalizing it is a pretty unsatisfactory
 model. You might have seen a version of a joke due originally to semanticist Barbara
 Partee (Carlson, 1977):
 Q: What’s the meaning of life?
 A: LIFE ’
 Surely we can do better than this! After all, we’ll want a model of word meaning
 to do all sorts of things for us. It should tell us that some words have similar meanings (cat is similar to dog), others are antonyms (cold is the opposite of hot), some
 have positive connotations (happy) while others have negative connotations (sad). It
 should represent the fact that the meanings of buy, sell, and pay offer differing perspectives on the same underlying purchasing event. (If I buy something from you,
 you’ve probably sold it to me, and I likely paid you.) More generally, a model of
 word meaning should allow us to draw inferences to address meaning-related tasks
 like question-answering or dialogue.
 In this section we summarize some of these desiderata, drawing on results in the
 lexical linguistic study of word meaning, which is called lexical semantics; we’ll return to
 semantics
 and expand on this list in Appendix G and Chapter 21.
 Lemmas and Senses Let’s start by looking at how one word (we’ll choose mouse)
 might be defined in a dictionary (simplified from the online dictionary WordNet):
 mouse (N)
 1. any of numerous small rodents...
 2. a hand-operated device that controls a cursor...
 lemma Here the form mouse is the lemma, also called the citation form. The form
 citation form mouse would also be the lemma for the word mice; dictionaries don’t have separate
 definitions for inflected forms like mice. Similarly sing is the lemma for sing, sang,
 sung. In many languages the infinitive form is used as the lemma for the verb, so
 Spanish dormir “to sleep” is the lemma for duermes “you sleep”. The specific forms
 wordform sung or carpets or sing or duermes are called wordforms.
 As the example above shows, each lemma can have multiple meanings; the
 lemma mouse can refer to the rodent or the cursor control device. We call each
 of these aspects of the meaning of mouse a word sense. The fact that lemmas can
 be polysemous (have multiple senses) can make interpretation difficult (is someone who searches for “mouse info” looking for a pet or a widget?). Chapter 10
 and Appendix G will discuss the problem of polysemy, and introduce word sense
 disambiguation, the task of determining which sense of a word is being used in a
 particular context.
 Synonymy One important component of word meaning is the relationship between word senses. For example when one word has a sense whose meaning is
 5.1 • L EXICAL S EMANTICS 3

 identical to a sense of another word, or nearly identical, we say the two senses of
 synonym those two words are synonyms. Synonyms include such pairs as
 couch/sofa vomit/throw up filbert/hazelnut car/automobile
 A more formal definition of synonymy (between words rather than senses) is that
 two words are synonymous if they are substitutable for one another in any sentence
 without changing the truth conditions of the sentence, the situations in which the
 sentence would be true.
 While substitutions between some pairs of words like car / automobile or water / H2 O are truth preserving, the words are still not identical in meaning. Indeed,
 probably no two words are absolutely identical in meaning. One of the fundamental
 principle of tenets of semantics, called the principle of contrast (Girard 1718, Bréal 1897, Clark
 contrast
 1987), states that a difference in linguistic form is always associated with some difference in meaning. For example, the word H2 O is used in scientific contexts and
 would be inappropriate in a hiking guide—water would be more appropriate— and
 this genre difference is part of the meaning of the word. In practice, the word synonym is therefore used to describe a relationship of approximate or rough synonymy.
 Word Similarity While words don’t have many synonyms, most words do have
 lots of similar words. Cat is not a synonym of dog, but cats and dogs are certainly
 similar words. In moving from synonymy to similarity, it will be useful to shift from
 talking about relations between word senses (like synonymy) to relations between
 words (like similarity). Dealing with words avoids having to commit to a particular
 representation of word senses, which will turn out to simplify our task.
 similarity The notion of word similarity is very useful in larger semantic tasks. Knowing
 how similar two words are can help in computing how similar the meaning of two
 phrases or sentences are, a very important component of tasks like question answering, paraphrasing, and summarization. One way of getting values for word similarity
 is to ask humans to judge how similar one word is to another. A number of datasets
 have resulted from such experiments. For example the SimLex-999 dataset (Hill
 et al., 2015) gives values on a scale from 0 to 10, like the examples below, which
 range from near-synonyms (vanish, disappear) to pairs that scarcely seem to have
 anything in common (hole, agreement):
 vanish disappear 9.8
 belief impression 5.95
 muscle bone 3.65
 modest flexible 0.98
 hole agreement 0.3

 Word Relatedness The meaning of two words can be related in ways other than
 relatedness similarity. One such class of connections is called word relatedness (Budanitsky
 association and Hirst, 2006), also traditionally called word association in psychology.
 Consider the meanings of the words coffee and cup. Coffee is not similar to cup;
 they share practically no features (coffee is a plant or a beverage, while a cup is a
 manufactured object with a particular shape). But coffee and cup are clearly related;
 they are associated by co-participating in an everyday event (the event of drinking
 coffee out of a cup). Similarly scalpel and surgeon are not similar but are related
 eventively (a surgeon tends to make use of a scalpel).
 One common kind of relatedness between words is if they belong to the same
semantic field semantic field. A semantic field is a set of words which cover a particular semantic
 domain and bear structured relations with each other. For example, words might be
4 C HAPTER 5 • E MBEDDINGS

 related by being in the semantic field of hospitals (surgeon, scalpel, nurse, anesthetic, hospital), restaurants (waiter, menu, plate, food, chef), or houses (door, roof,
 topic models kitchen, family, bed). Semantic fields are also related to topic models, like Latent
 Dirichlet Allocation, LDA, which apply unsupervised learning on large sets of texts
 to induce sets of associated words from text. Semantic fields and topic models are
 very useful tools for discovering topical structure in documents.
 In Appendix G we’ll introduce more relations between senses like hypernymy
 or IS-A, antonymy (opposites) and meronymy (part-whole relations).
 connotations Connotation Finally, words have affective meanings or connotations. The word
 connotation has different meanings in different fields, but here we use it to mean the
 aspects of a word’s meaning that are related to a writer or reader’s emotions, sentiment, opinions, or evaluations. For example some words have positive connotations
 (wonderful) while others have negative connotations (dreary). Even words whose
 meanings are similar in other ways can vary in connotation; consider the difference
 in connotations between fake, knockoff, forgery, on the one hand, and copy, replica,
 reproduction on the other, or innocent (positive connotation) and naive (negative
 connotation). Some words describe positive evaluation (great, love) and others negative evaluation (terrible, hate). Positive or negative evaluation language is called
 sentiment sentiment, as we saw in Appendix K, and word sentiment plays a role in important tasks like sentiment analysis, stance detection, and applications of NLP to the
 language of politics and consumer reviews.
 Early work on affective meaning (Osgood et al., 1957) found that words varied
 along three important dimensions of affective meaning:
 valence: the pleasantness of the stimulus
 arousal: the intensity of emotion provoked by the stimulus
 dominance: the degree of control exerted by the stimulus
 Thus words like happy or satisfied are high on valence, while unhappy or annoyed are low on valence. Excited is high on arousal, while calm is low on arousal.
 Controlling is high on dominance, while awed or influenced are low on dominance.
 Each word is thus represented by three numbers, corresponding to its value on each
 of the three dimensions:
 Valence Arousal Dominance
 courageous 8.0 5.5 7.4
 music 7.7 5.6 6.5
 heartbreak 2.5 5.7 3.6
 cub 6.7 4.0 4.2
 Osgood et al. (1957) noticed that in using these 3 numbers to represent the
 meaning of a word, the model was representing each word as a point in a threedimensional space, a vector whose three dimensions corresponded to the word’s
 rating on the three scales. This revolutionary idea that word meaning could be represented as a point in space (e.g., that part of the meaning of heartbreak can be
 represented as the point [2.5, 5.7, 3.6]) was the first expression of the vector semantics models that we introduce next.

 vector Vector semantics is the standard way to represent word meaning in NLP, helping
 semantics
 5.2 • V ECTOR S EMANTICS : T HE I NTUITION 5

 us model many of the aspects of word meaning we saw in the previous section. The
 roots of the model lie in the 1950s when two big ideas converged: Osgood’s 1957
 idea mentioned above to use a point in three-dimensional space to represent the
 connotation of a word, and the proposal by linguists like Joos (1950), Harris (1954),
 and Firth (1957) to define the meaning of a word by its distribution in language
 use, meaning its neighboring words or grammatical environments. Their idea was
 that two words that occur in very similar distributions (whose neighboring words are
 similar) have similar meanings.
 For example, suppose you didn’t know the meaning of the word ongchoi (a recent borrowing from Cantonese) but you see it in the following contexts:
 (5.1) Ongchoi is delicious sauteed with garlic.
 (5.2) Ongchoi is superb over rice.
 (5.3) ...ongchoi leaves with salty sauces...
 And suppose that you had seen many of these context words in other contexts:
 (5.4) ...spinach sauteed with garlic over rice...
 (5.5) ...chard stems and leaves are delicious...
 (5.6) ...collard greens and other salty leafy greens
 The fact that ongchoi occurs with words like rice and garlic and delicious and
 salty, as do words like spinach, chard, and collard greens might suggest that ongchoi
 is a leafy green similar to these other leafy greens.1 We can implement the same
 intuition computationally by just counting words in the context of ongchoi.

 https://projector.tensorflow.org/.

 The idea of vector semantics is to represent a word as a point in a multidimensional semantic space that is derived (in different ways we’ll see) from the distriembeddings butions of word neighbors. Vectors for representing words are called embeddings.
 The word “embedding” derives historically from its mathematical sense as a mapping from one space or structure to another, although the meaning has shifted; see
 the end of the chapter.
 Fig. 5.1 shows a visualization of embeddings learned by the word2vec algorithm,
 showing the location of selected words (neighbors of “sweet”) projected down from
 1 It’s in fact Ipomoea aquatica, a relative of morning glory sometimes called water spinach in English.
6 C HAPTER 5 • E MBEDDINGS

 200-dimensional space into a 2-dimensional space. Note that the nearest neighbors
 of sweet are semantically related words like honey, candy, juice, chocolate. This idea
 that similar words are near each other in high-dimensional space is an important
 that offers enormous power to language models and other NLP applications. For
 example the sentiment classifiers of Chapter 4 depend on the same words appearing
 in the training and test sets. But by representing words as embeddings, a classifier
 can assign sentiment as long as it sees some words with similar meanings. And as
 we’ll see, vector semantic models like the ones showed in Fig. 5.1 can be learned
 automatically from text without supervision.
 In this chapter we’ll begin with a simple pedagogical model of embeddings in
 which the meaning of a word is defined by a vector with the counts of nearby words.
 We introduce this model as a helpful way to understand the concept of vectors and
 what it means for a vector to be a representation of word meaning, but more sophisticated variants like the tf-idf model we will introduce in Chapter 11 are important
 methods you should understand. We will see that this method results in very long
 vectors that are sparse, i.e. mostly zeros (since most words simply never occur in the
 context of others). We’ll then introduce the word2vec model family for constructing
 short, dense vectors that have even more useful semantic properties.
 We’ll also introduce the cosine, the standard way to use embeddings to compute semantic similarity, between two words, two sentences, or two documents, an
 important tool in practical applications.

 “The most important attributes of a vector in 3-space are {Location, Location, Location}”
 Randall Munroe, the hover from https://xkcd.com/2358/
 Let’s now introduce the first way to compute word vector embeddings. This simplest vector model of meaning is based on the co-occurrence matrix, a way of representing how often words co-occur. We’ll define a particular kind of co-occurrence
 word-context matrix, the word-context matrix, in which each row in the matrix represents a word
 matrix
 in the vocabulary and each column represents how often each other word in the vocabulary appears nearby. This matrix is thus of dimensionality |V | × |V | and each
 cell records the number of times the row (target) word and the column (context)
 word co-occur nearby in some training corpus.
 What do we mean by ‘nearby’? We could implement various methods, but let’s
 start with a very simple one: a context window around the word, let’s say of 4 words
 to the left and 4 words to the right. If we do that, each cell will represents the
 number of times (in some training corpus) the column word occurs in such a ±4
 word window around the row word.
 Let’s see how this works for 4 words: cherry, strawberry, digital, and information. For each word we took a single instance from a corpus, and we show the ±4
 word window from that instance:
 is traditionally followed by cherry pie, a traditional dessert
 often mixed, such as strawberry rhubarb pie. Apple pie
 computer peripherals and personal digital assistants. These devices usually
 a computer. This includes information available on the internet
 If we then take every occurrence of each word in a large corpus and count the
 context words around it, we get a word-context co-occurrence matrix. The full word-
5.3 • S IMPLE COUNT- BASED EMBEDDINGS 7

 context co-occurrence matrix is very large, because for each word in the vocabulary
 (since |V |) we have to count how often it occurs with every other word in the vocabulary, hence dimensionality |V | × |V |. Let’s therefore instead sketch the process
 on a smaller scale. Imagine that we are going to look at only the 4 words, and only
 consider the following 3 context words: a, computer, and pie. Furthermore let’s
 assume we only count occurrences in the mini-corpus above.
 So before looking at Fig. 5.2, compute by hand the counts for these 3 context
 words for the four words cherry, strawberry, digital, and information.

 a computer pie
 cherry 1 0 1
 strawberry 0 0 2
 digital 0 1 0
 information 1 1 0
 showing just 3 of the potential context word dimensions. The vector for cherry is outlined in
 red. Note that a real vector would have vastly more dimensions and thus be even sparser.

 Hopefully your count matches what is shown in Fig. 5.2, so that each cell represents the number of times a particular word (defined by the row) occurs in a particular context (defined by the word column).
 Each row, then, is a vector representing a word. To review some basic linear
 vector algebra, a vector is, at heart, just a list or array of numbers. So cherry is represented
 as the list [1,0,1] (the first row vector in Fig. 5.2) and information is represented as
 the list [1,1,0] (the fourth row vector).
vector space A vector space is a collection of vectors, and is characterized by its dimension.
 dimension Vectors in a 3-dimensional vector space have an element for each dimension of the
 space. We will loosely refer to a vector in a 3-dimensional space as a 3-dimensional
 vector, with one element along each dimension. In the example in Fig. 5.2, we’ve
 chosen to make the document vectors of dimension 3, just so they fit on the page; in
 real term-document matrices, the document vectors would have dimensionality |V |,
 the vocabulary size.
 The ordering of the numbers in a vector space indicates the different dimensions
 on which documents vary. The third dimension for all these vectors corresponds
 to the number of times pie occurs in the context. The second dimension for all of
 them corresponds to the number of times the word computer occurs. Notice that
 the vectors for information and digital have the same value (1) for this “computer”
 dimension.
 In reality, we don’t compute word vectors on a single context window. Instead,
 we compute them over an entire corpus. Let’s see what some real counts look like.
 Let’s look at some vectors computed in this way. Fig. 5.3 shows a subset of the
 word-word co-occurrence matrix for these four words, where, again because it’s
 impossible to visualize all |V | possible context words on the page of this textbook,
 we show a subset of 6 of the dimensions, with counts computed from the Wikipedia
 corpus (Davies, 2015).
 Note in Fig. 5.3 that the two words cherry and strawberry are more similar to
 each other (both pie and sugar tend to occur in their window) than they are to other
 words like digital; conversely, digital and information are more similar to each other
 than, say, to strawberry.
 We can think of the vector for a document as a point in |V |-dimensional space;
 thus the documents in Fig. 5.3 are points in 3-dimensional space. Fig. 5.4 shows a
 spatial visualization.
8 C HAPTER 5 • E MBEDDINGS

 aardvark ... computer data result pie sugar ...
 cherry 0 ... 2 8 9 442 25 ...
 strawberry 0 ... 0 0 1 60 19 ...
 digital 0 ... 1670 1683 85 5 4 ...
 information 0 ... 3325 3982 378 5 13 ...
 the dimensions (hand-picked for pedagogical purposes). The vector for digital is outlined in
 red. Note that a real vector would have vastly more dimensions and thus be much sparser, i.e.
 would have zero values in most dimensions.

 computer information
 3000 [3982,3325]
 digital
 2000 [1683,1670]

 1000 2000 3000 4000
 data
 two of the dimensions, corresponding to the words data and computer.

 Note that |V |, the dimensionality of the vector, is generally the size of the vocabulary, often between 10,000 and 50,000 words (using the most frequent words
 in the training corpus; keeping words after about the most frequent 50,000 or so is
 generally not helpful). Since most of these numbers are zero these are sparse vector
 representations; there are efficient algorithms for storing and computing with sparse
 matrices.
 It’s also possible to applying various kinds of weighting functions to the counts
 in these cells. The most popular such weighting is tf-idf, which we’ll introduce in
 Chapter 11, but there have historically been a wide variety of other weightings.
 Now that we have some intuitions, let’s move on to examine the details of computing word similarity.

 To measure similarity between two target words v and w, we need a metric that
 takes two vectors (of the same dimensionality, either both with words as dimensions,
 hence of length |V |, or both with documents as dimensions, of length |D|) and gives
 a measure of their similarity. By far the most common similarity metric is the cosine
 of the angle between the vectors.
 The cosine—like most measures for vector similarity used in NLP—is based on
 dot product the dot product operator from linear algebra, also called the inner product:
 inner product
 N
 X
 dot product(v, w) = v · w = vi wi = v1 w1 + v2 w2 + ... + vN wN (5.7)
 i=1

 The dot product acts as a similarity metric because it will tend to be high just when
 the two vectors have large values in the same dimensions. Alternatively, vectors that
 5.4 • C OSINE FOR MEASURING SIMILARITY 9

 have zeros in different dimensions—orthogonal vectors—will have a dot product of
 0, representing their strong dissimilarity.
 This raw dot product, however, has a problem as a similarity metric: it favors
vector length long vectors. The vector length is defined as
 v
 u N
 uX
 |v| = t v2i (5.8)
 i=1

 The dot product is higher if a vector is longer, with higher values in each dimension.
 More frequent words have longer vectors, since they tend to co-occur with more
 words and have higher co-occurrence values with each of them. The raw dot product
 thus will be higher for frequent words. But this is a problem; we’d like a similarity
 metric that tells us how similar two words are regardless of their frequency.
 We modify the dot product to normalize for the vector length by dividing the
 dot product by the lengths of each of the two vectors. This normalized dot product
 turns out to be the same as the cosine of the angle between the two vectors, following
 from the definition of the dot product between two vectors a and b:

 a · b = |a||b| cos θ
 a·b
 = cos θ (5.9)
 cosine The cosine similarity metric between two vectors v and w thus can be computed as:
 N
 X
 vi wi
 v·w i=1
 cosine(v, w) = =v v (5.10)
 |v||w| u
 uXN u N
 uX
 t v2 t iw2 i
 i=1 i=1

 For some applications we pre-normalize each vector, by dividing it by its length,
 unit vector creating a unit vector of length 1. Thus we could compute a unit vector from a by
 dividing it by |a|. For unit vectors, the dot product is the same as the cosine.
 The cosine value ranges from 1 for vectors pointing in the same direction, through
 0 for orthogonal vectors, to -1 for vectors pointing in opposite directions. But since
 raw frequency values are non-negative, the cosine for these vectors ranges from 0–1.
 Let’s see how the cosine computes which of the words cherry or digital is closer
 in meaning to information, just using raw counts from the following shortened table:
 pie data computer
 cherry 442 8 2
 digital 5 1683 1670
 information 5 3982 3325

 442 ∗ 5 + 8 ∗ 3982 + 2 ∗ 3325
 cos(cherry, information) = √ √ = .018
 4422 + 82 + 22 52 + 39822 + 33252
 5 ∗ 5 + 1683 ∗ 3982 + 1670 ∗ 3325
 cos(digital, information) = √ √ = .996
 5 + 16832 + 16702 52 + 39822 + 33252

 The model decides that information is way closer to digital than it is to cherry, a
 result that seems sensible. Fig. 5.5 shows a visualization.
10 C HAPTER 5 • E MBEDDINGS

 Dimension 1: ‘pie’
 cherry
 digital information

 500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000

 Dimension 2: ‘computer’
 three words (cherry, digital, and information) in the two dimensional space defined by counts
 of the words computer and pie nearby. The figure doesn’t show the cosine, but it highlights the
 angles; note that the angle between digital and information is smaller than the angle between
 cherry and information. When two vectors are more similar, the cosine is larger but the angle
 is smaller; the cosine has its maximum (1) when the angle between two vectors is smallest
 (0◦ ); the cosine of all other angles is less than 1.

 can be used to compute word similarity, for tasks like finding word paraphrases,
 tracking changes in word meaning, or automatically discovering meanings of words
 in different corpora. For example, we can find the 10 most similar words to any
 target word w by computing the cosines between w and each of the |V | − 1 other
 words, sorting, and looking at the top 10.

 In the previous sections we saw how to represent a word as a sparse, long vector with
 dimensions corresponding to words in the vocabulary. We now introduce a more
 powerful word representation: embeddings, short dense vectors. Unlike the vectors
 we’ve seen so far, embeddings are short, with number of dimensions d ranging from
 50-1000, rather than the much larger vocabulary size |V |.These d dimensions don’t
 have a clear interpretation. And the vectors are dense: instead of vector entries
 being sparse, mostly-zero counts or functions of counts, the values will be realvalued numbers that can be negative.
 It turns out that dense vectors work better in every NLP task than sparse vectors.
 While we don’t completely understand all the reasons for this, we have some intuitions. Representing words as 300-dimensional dense vectors requires our classifiers
 to learn far fewer weights than if we represented words as 50,000-dimensional vectors, and the smaller parameter space possibly helps with generalization and avoiding overfitting. Dense vectors may also do a better job of capturing synonymy.
 For example, in a sparse vector representation, dimensions for synonyms like car
 and automobile dimension are distinct and unrelated; sparse vectors may thus fail
 to capture the similarity between a word with car as a neighbor and a word with
 automobile as a neighbor.
 skip-gram In this section we introduce one method for computing embeddings: skip-gram
 SGNS with negative sampling, sometimes called SGNS. The skip-gram algorithm is one
 word2vec of two algorithms in a software package called word2vec, and so sometimes the
 algorithm is loosely referred to as word2vec (Mikolov et al. 2013a, Mikolov et al.
 2013b). The word2vec methods are fast, efficient to train, and easily available online with code and pretrained embeddings. Word2vec embeddings are static em-
5.5 • W ORD 2 VEC 11

 static
 embeddings beddings, meaning that the method learns one fixed embedding for each word in the
 vocabulary. In Chapter 10 we’ll introduce methods for learning dynamic contextual
 embeddings like the popular family of BERT representations, in which the vector
 for each word is different in different contexts.
 The intuition of word2vec is that instead of counting how often each word w occurs near, say, apricot, we’ll instead train a classifier on a binary prediction task: “Is
 word w likely to show up near apricot?” We don’t actually care about this prediction
 task; instead we’ll take the learned classifier weights as the word embeddings.
 The revolutionary intuition here is that we can just use running text as implicitly
 supervised training data for such a classifier; a word c that occurs near the target
 word apricot acts as gold ‘correct answer’ to the question “Is word c likely to show
self-supervision up near apricot?” This method, often called self-supervision, avoids the need for
 any sort of hand-labeled supervision signal. This idea was first proposed in the task
 of neural language modeling, when Bengio et al. (2003) and Collobert et al. (2011)
 showed that a neural language model (a neural network that learned to predict the
 next word from prior words) could just use the next word in running text as its
 supervision signal, and could be used to learn an embedding representation for each
 word as part of doing this prediction task.
 We’ll see how to do neural networks in the next chapter, but word2vec is a
 much simpler model than the neural network language model, in two ways. First,
 word2vec simplifies the task (making it binary classification instead of word prediction). Second, word2vec simplifies the architecture (training a logistic regression
 classifier instead of a multi-layer neural network with hidden layers that demand
 more sophisticated training algorithms). The intuition of skip-gram is:
 1. Treat the target word and a neighboring context word as positive examples.
 2. Randomly sample other words in the lexicon to get negative samples.
 3. Use logistic regression to train a classifier to distinguish those two cases.
 4. Use the learned weights as the embeddings.

 5.5.1 The classifier
 Let’s start by thinking about the classification task, and then turn to how to train.
 Imagine a sentence like the following, with a target word apricot, and assume we’re
 using a window of ±2 context words:
 ... lemon, a [tablespoon of apricot jam, a] pinch ...
 c1 c2 w c3 c4
 Our goal is to train a classifier such that, given a tuple (w, c) of a target word
 w paired with a candidate context word c (for example (apricot, jam), or perhaps
 (apricot, aardvark)) it will return the probability that c is a real context word (true
 for jam, false for aardvark):

 P(+|w, c) (5.11)
 The probability that word c is not a real context word for w is just 1 minus
 Eq. 5.11:

 P(−|w, c) = 1 − P(+|w, c) (5.12)
 How does the classifier compute the probability P? The intuition of the skipgram model is to base this probability on embedding similarity: a word is likely to
12 C HAPTER 5 • E MBEDDINGS

 occur near the target if its embedding vector is similar to the target embedding. To
 compute similarity between these dense embeddings, we rely on the intuition that
 two vectors are similar if they have a high dot product (after all, cosine is just a
 normalized dot product). In other words:

 Similarity(w, c) ≈ c · w (5.13)

 The dot product c · w is not a probability, it’s just a number ranging from −∞ to ∞
 (since the elements in word2vec embeddings can be negative, the dot product can be
 negative). To turn the dot product into a probability, we’ll use the logistic or sigmoid
 function σ (x), the fundamental core of logistic regression:
 σ (x) = (5.14)
 1 + exp (−x)
 We model the probability that word c is a real context word for target word w as:
 P(+|w, c) = σ (c · w) = (5.15)
 1 + exp (−c · w)
 The sigmoid function returns a number between 0 and 1, but to make it a probability
 we’ll also need the total probability of the two possible events (c is a context word,
 and c isn’t a context word) to sum to 1. We thus estimate the probability that word c
 is not a real context word for w as:

 P(−|w, c) = 1 − P(+|w, c)
 = σ (−c · w) = (5.16)
 1 + exp (c · w)
 Equation 5.15 gives us the probability for one word, but there are many context
 words in the window. Skip-gram makes the simplifying assumption that all context
 words are independent, allowing us to just multiply their probabilities:
 L
 Y
 P(+|w, c1:L ) = σ (ci · w) (5.17)
 i=1
 XL
 log P(+|w, c1:L ) = log σ (ci · w) (5.18)
 i=1

 In summary, skip-gram trains a probabilistic classifier that, given a test target word
 w and its context window of L words c1:L , assigns a probability based on how similar
 this context window is to the target word. The probability is based on applying the
 logistic (sigmoid) function to the dot product of the embeddings of the target word
 with each context word. To compute this probability, we just need embeddings for
 each target word and context word in the vocabulary.
 Fig. 5.6 shows the intuition of the parameters we’ll need. Skip-gram actually
 stores two embeddings for each word, one for the word as a target, and one for the
 word considered as context. Thus the parameters we need to learn are two matrices
 W and C, each containing an embedding for every one of the |V | words in the
 vocabulary V .2 Let’s now turn to learning these embeddings (which is the real goal
 of training this classifier in the first place).
 2 In principle the target matrix and the context matrix could use different vocabularies, but we’ll simplify
 by assuming one shared vocabulary V .
 5.5 • W ORD 2 VEC 13

 1..d
 aardvark 1

 apricot

 𝜽=
 … … W target words

 zebra |V|
 aardvark |V|+1
 apricot

 C context & noise
 … …
 words
 zebra 2|V|

the context embedding (sometimes called the output embedding). The parameter θ that the algorithm learns is thus a matrix of 2|V | vectors, each of dimension d, formed by concatenating
two matrices, the target embeddings W and the context+noise embeddings C.

5.5.2 Learning skip-gram embeddings
The learning algorithm for skip-gram embeddings takes as input a corpus of text,
and a chosen vocabulary size N. It begins by assigning a random embedding vector
for each of the N vocabulary words, and then proceeds to iteratively shift the embedding of each word w to be more like the embeddings of words that occur nearby
in texts, and less like the embeddings of words that don’t occur nearby. Let’s start
by considering a single piece of training data:
... lemon, a [tablespoon of apricot jam, a] pinch ...
 c1 c2 w c3 c4
 This example has a target word w (apricot), and 4 context words in the L = ±2
window, resulting in 4 positive training instances (on the left below):
 positive examples + negative examples -
 w cpos w cneg w cneg
 apricot tablespoon apricot aardvark apricot seven
 apricot of apricot my apricot forever
 apricot jam apricot where apricot dear
 apricot a apricot coaxial apricot if
 For training a binary classifier we also need negative examples. In fact skipgram with negative sampling (SGNS) uses more negative examples than positive
examples (with the ratio between them set by a parameter k). So for each of these
(w, cpos ) training instances we’ll create k negative samples, each consisting of the
target w plus a ‘noise word’ cneg . A noise word is a random word from the lexicon,
constrained not to be the target word w. The table right above shows the setting
where k = 2, so we’ll have 2 negative examples in the negative training set − for
each positive example w, cpos .
 The noise words are chosen according to their weighted unigram probability
pα (w), where α is a weight. If we were sampling according to unweighted probability P(w), it would mean that with unigram probability P(“the”) we would choose
the word the as a noise word, with unigram probability P(“aardvark”) we would
choose aardvark, and so on. But in practice it is common to set α = 0.75, i.e. use
14 C HAPTER 5 • E MBEDDINGS

 the weighting P3 (w):

 count(w)α
 Pα (w) = P 0 α
 (5.19)
 w0 count(w )

 Setting α = .75 gives better performance because it gives rare noise words slightly
 higher probability: for rare words, Pα (w) > P(w). To illustrate this intuition, it
 might help to work out the probabilities for an example with α = .75 and two events,
 P(a) = 0.99 and P(b) = 0.01:

 .99.75
 Pα (a) = = 0.97
 .99.75 + .01.75
 .01.75
 Pα (b) = = 0.03 (5.20)
 .99 + .01.75
 .75

 Thus using α = .75 increases the probability of the rare event b from 0.01 to 0.03.
 Given the set of positive and negative training instances, and an initial set of
 embeddings, the goal of the learning algorithm is to adjust those embeddings to

 • Maximize the similarity of the target word, context word pairs (w, cpos ) drawn
 from the positive examples
 • Minimize the similarity of the (w, cneg ) pairs from the negative examples.

 If we consider one word/context pair (w, cpos ) with its k noise words cneg1 ...cnegk ,
 we can express these two goals as the following loss function L to be minimized
 (hence the −); here the first term expresses that we want the classifier to assign the
 real context word cpos a high probability of being a neighbor, and the second term
 expresses that we want to assign each of the noise words cnegi a high probability of
 being a non-neighbor, all multiplied because we assume independence:
 " k
 #
 Y
 L = − log P(+|w, cpos ) P(−|w, cnegi )
 i=1
 " k
 #
 X
 = − log P(+|w, cpos ) + log P(−|w, cnegi )
 i=1
 " k
 #
 X 
 = − log P(+|w, cpos ) + log 1 − P(+|w, cnegi )
 i=1
 " k
 #
 X
 = − log σ (cpos · w) + log σ (−cnegi · w) (5.21)
 i=1

 That is, we want to maximize the dot product of the word with the actual context
 words, and minimize the dot products of the word with the k negative sampled nonneighbor words.
 We minimize this loss function using stochastic gradient descent. Fig. 5.7 shows
 the intuition of one step of learning.
 To get the gradient, we need to take the derivative of Eq. 5.21 with respect to
 the different embeddings. It turns out the derivatives are the following (we leave the
 5.5 • W ORD 2 VEC 15

 aardvark
 move apricot and jam closer,
 apricot w increasing cpos z w
 W
 “…apricot jam…”
 zebra
 ! aardvark move apricot and matrix apart
 cpos decreasing cneg1 z w
 jam

 C matrix cneg1
 k=2
 Tolstoy cneg2 move apricot and Tolstoy apart
 decreasing cneg2 z w
 zebra

 with) context embeddings for nearby words (here jam) and further from (lower dot product
 with) context embeddings for noise words that don’t occur nearby (here Tolstoy and matrix).

 proof as an exercise at the end of the chapter):

 ∂L
 = [σ (cpos · w) − 1]w (5.22)
 ∂ cpos
 ∂L
 = [σ (cneg · w)]w (5.23)
 ∂ cneg
 k
 ∂L X
 = [σ (cpos · w) − 1]cpos + [σ (cnegi · w)]cnegi (5.24)
 ∂w
 i=1

 The update equations going from time step t to t + 1 in stochastic gradient descent
 are thus:

 ct+1 t t t
 pos = cpos − η[σ (cpos · w ) − 1]w
 t
 (5.25)
 ct+1
 neg = ctneg − η[σ (ctneg · wt )]wt (5.26)
 " k
 #
 X
 wt+1 = wt − η [σ (ctpos · wt ) − 1]ctpos + [σ (ctnegi · wt )]ctnegi (5.27)
 i=1

 Just as in logistic regression, then, the learning algorithm starts with randomly initialized W and C matrices, and then walks through the training corpus using gradient
 descent to move W and C so as to minimize the loss in Eq. 5.21 by making the updates in (Eq. 5.25)-(Eq. 5.27).
 Recall that the skip-gram model learns two separate embeddings for each word i:
 target
embedding the target embedding wi and the context embedding ci , stored in two matrices, the
 context
embedding target matrix W and the context matrix C. It’s common to just add them together,
 representing word i with the vector wi + ci . Alternatively we can throw away the C
 matrix and just represent each word i by the vector wi .
 As with the simple count-based methods like tf-idf, the context window size L
 affects the performance of skip-gram embeddings, and experiments often tune the
 parameter L on a devset.
 16 C HAPTER 5 • E MBEDDINGS

 5.5.3 Other kinds of static embeddings
 fasttext There are many kinds of static embeddings. An extension of word2vec, fasttext
 (Bojanowski et al., 2017), addresses a problem with word2vec as we have presented
 it so far: it has no good way to deal with unknown words—words that appear in
 a test corpus but were unseen in the training corpus. A related problem is word
 sparsity, such as in languages with rich morphology, where some of the many forms
 for each noun and verb may only occur rarely. Fasttext deals with these problems
 by using subword models, representing each word as itself plus a bag of constituent
 n-grams, with special boundary symbols < and > added to each word. For example,
 with n = 3 the word where would be represented by the sequence <where> plus the
 character n-grams:
 <wh, whe, her, ere, re>
 Then a skipgram embedding is learned for each constituent n-gram, and the word
 where is represented by the sum of all of the embeddings of its constituent n-grams.
hde, Gonnerman, Plaut Unknown words
 Modeling can then
 Word Meaning Usingbe presented
 Lexical only by the sum of the constituent n-grams.
 Co-Occurrence
 A fasttext open-source library, including pretrained embeddings for 157 languages,
 is available at https://fasttext.cc.
 Another very widely used static embedding model is GloVe (Pennington et al.,
 RUSSIA

 2014), short for Global Vectors, because the model is based on capturing global
 FRANCE
 CHINA

 WRIST
 corpus statistics. GloVe is based on ratios of probabilities from the word-word co-
EUROPE
 ASIA
 AFRICA
 ANKLE
 ARM
 occurrence matrix. AMERICA
 BRAZIL
 SHOULDER
 FINGER
 EAR
 EYE
 FACE
 HAND It turns out that dense embeddings like word2vec actually have an elegant math-
MOSCOW
 TOE LEG
 FOOT ematical relationship with count-based embeddings, in which word2vec can be seen
 HAWAII
 TOOTH
 NOSE
 HEAD as implicitly optimizing a function of a count matrix with a particular (PPMI) weight-
TOKYO

 ing (Levy and Goldberg, 2014c).
 MONTREAL
 CHICAGO
 ATLANTA
 MOUSE

 5.6
 DOG
 CAT
 Visualizing Embeddings
 TURTLE
 LION NASHVILLE
 PUPPY
 KITTEN COW

 OYSTER
 “I see well in many dimensions as long as the dimensions are around two.”
 BULL The late economist Martin Shubik
 Visualizing embeddings is an important goal in helping understand, apply, and
 improve these models of word meaning. But how can we visualize a (for example)
 100-dimensional vector?
 WRIST The simplest way to visualize the meaning of a word
 ANKLE
 SHOULDER
 ARM
 w embedded in a space is to list the most similar words to
 LEG
 HAND w by sorting the vectors for all words in the vocabulary by
 FOOT
 HEAD
 NOSE
 their cosine with the vector for w. For example the 7 closest
 FINGER
 TOE words to frog using a particular embeddings computed with
 FACE
 EAR
 EYE
 the GloVe algorithm are: frogs, toad, litoria, leptodactyli-
TOOTH
 DOG dae, rana, lizard, and eleutherodactylus (Pennington et al.,
 CAT
 PUPPY
 KITTEN
 2014).
 COW
 MOUSE Yet another visualization method is to use a clustering
 TURTLE

 LION
 OYSTER algorithm to show a hierarchical representation of which
 BULL
 CHICAGO words are similar to others in the embedding space. The
 ATLANTA
 MONTREAL
 NASHVILLE
 uncaptioned figure on the left uses hierarchical clustering
 TOKYO
 CHINA of some embedding vectors for nouns as a visualization
 RUSSIA
 AFRICA
 ASIA
 method (Rohde et al., 2006).
 EUROPE
 AMERICA
 BRAZIL
 MOSCOW
 FRANCE
 HAWAII

 5.7 • S EMANTIC PROPERTIES OF EMBEDDINGS 17

 Probably the most common visualization method, however, is to project the 100 dimensions of a word down into 2
 dimensions. Fig. 5.1 showed one such visualization, as does
 Fig. 5.9, using a projection method called t-SNE (van der
 Maaten and Hinton, 2008).

 In this section we briefly summarize some of the semantic properties of embeddings
 that have been studied.
 Different types of similarity or association: One parameter of vector semantic
 models that is relevant to both sparse PPMI vectors and dense word2vec vectors is
 the size of the context window used to collect counts. This is generally between 1
 and 10 words on each side of the target word (for a total context of 2-20 words).
 The choice depends on the goals of the representation. Shorter context windows
 tend to lead to representations that are a bit more syntactic, since the information is
 coming from immediately nearby words. When the vectors are computed from short
 context windows, the most similar words to a target word w tend to be semantically
 similar words with the same parts of speech. When vectors are computed from long
 context windows, the highest cosine words to a target word w tend to be words that
 are topically related but not similar.
 For example Levy and Goldberg (2014a) showed that using skip-gram with a
 window of ±2, the most similar words to the word Hogwarts (from the Harry Potter
 series) were names of other fictional schools: Sunnydale (from Buffy the Vampire
 Slayer) or Evernight (from a vampire series). With a window of ±5, the most similar
 words to Hogwarts were other words topically related to the Harry Potter series:
 Dumbledore, Malfoy, and half-blood.
 It’s also often useful to distinguish two kinds of similarity or association between
 first-order words (Schütze and Pedersen, 1993). Two words have first-order co-occurrence
 co-occurrence
 (sometimes called syntagmatic association) if they are typically nearby each other.
 Thus wrote is a first-order associate of book or poem. Two words have second-order
 second-order co-occurrence (sometimes called paradigmatic association) if they have similar
 co-occurrence
 neighbors. Thus wrote is a second-order associate of words like said or remarked.
 Analogy/Relational Similarity: Another semantic property of embeddings is their
 ability to capture relational meanings. In an important early vector space model of
parallelogram cognition, Rumelhart and Abrahamson (1973) proposed the parallelogram model
 model
 for solving simple analogy problems of the form a is to b as a* is to what?. In such
 problems, a system is given a problem like apple:tree::grape:?, i.e., apple is to tree
 as grape is to , and must fill in the word vine. In the parallelogram model, il-
 # » # »
 lustrated in Fig. 5.8, the vector from the word apple to the word tree (= tree − apple)
 # » the nearest word to that point is returned.
 is added to the vector for grape (grape);
 In early work with sparse embeddings, scholars showed that sparse vector models of meaning could solve such analogy problems (Turney and Littman, 2005),
 but the parallelogram method received more modern attention because of its success with word2vec or GloVe vectors (Mikolov et al. 2013c, Levy and Goldberg
 # »
 2014b, Pennington et al. 2014). For example, the result of the expression king −
 # » + woman
 # » is a vector close to queen. # » # » # »
 # » Similarly, Paris − France + Italy results
 man
 # »
 in a vector that is close to Rome. The embedding model thus seems to be extract-
18 C HAPTER 5 • E MBEDDINGS

 tree
 apple

 vine
 grape
 # » # » # » # »
 1973): the location of vine can be found by subtracting apple from tree and adding grape.

 ing representations of relations like MALE - FEMALE, or CAPITAL - CITY- OF, or even
 COMPARATIVE / SUPERLATIVE , as shown in Fig. 5.9 from GloVe.

 (a) (b)
 # » # » # » is close to queen.
 # » (b) offsets seem to capture comparative and superlative morphology
(a) king − man + woman
(Pennington et al., 2014).

 For a a : b :: a∗ : b∗ problem, meaning the algorithm is given vectors a, b, and
 a∗ and must find b∗ , the parallelogram method is thus:

 b̂∗ = argmin distance(x, b − a + a∗ ) (5.28)
 x

 with some distance function, such as Euclidean distance.
 There are some caveats. For example, the closest value returned by the parallelogram algorithm in word2vec or GloVe embedding spaces is usually not in fact
 b* but one of the 3 input words or their morphological variants (i.e., cherry:red ::
 potato:x returns potato or potatoes instead of brown), so these must be explicitly
 excluded. Furthermore while embedding spaces perform well if the task involves
 frequent words, small distances, and certain relations (like relating countries with
 their capitals or verbs/nouns with their inflected forms), the parallelogram method
 with embeddings doesn’t work as well for other relations (Linzen 2016, Gladkova
 et al. 2016, Schluter 2018, Ethayarajh et al. 2019a), and indeed Peterson et al. (2020)
 argue that the parallelogram method is in general too simple to model the human
 cognitive process of forming analogies of this kind.
 5.8 • B IAS AND E MBEDDINGS 19

 5.7.1 Embeddings and Historical Semantics
 Embeddings can also be a useful tool for studying how meaning changes over time,
 by computing multiple embedding spaces, each from texts written in a particular
 time period. For example Fig. 5.10 shows a visualization of changes in meaning in
 English words over the last two centuries, computed by building separate embedding
 spaces for each
 CHAPTER decade fromSOCIAL
 5. DYNAMIC historicalREPRESENTATIONS
 corpora like Google n-grams (Lin etMEANING79
 OF WORD al., 2012)
 and the Corpus of Historical American English (Davies, 2012).

 Figure
 word2vec5.1: Two-dimensional
 vectors. The modern sensevisualization of semantic
 of each word, and the change in English
 grey context words,using SGNS
 are comvectors
 puted from(seetheSection 5.8 for
 most recent the visualization
 (modern) algorithm).
 time-point embedding A,Earlier
 space. The word
 pointsgay shifted
 are comfrom
 puted meaning “cheerful”
 from earlier historicalorembedding
 “frolicsome” to referring
 spaces. to homosexuality.
 The visualizations A, In the
 show the changes early
 in the
 20th century broadcast referred to “casting out seeds”; with the rise of television
 word gay from meanings related to “cheerful” or “frolicsome” to referring to homosexuality, and
 radio
 the development of the modern “transmission” sense of broadcast from its original sense of of
 its meaning shifted to “transmitting signals”. C, Awful underwent a process
 pejoration,
 sowing seeds,asandit shifted from meaning
 the pejoration “full
 of the word of awe”
 awful to meaning
 as it shifted “terrible“full
 from meaning or appalling”
 of awe”
 [212].
 to meaning “terrible or appalling” (Hamilton et al., 2016).

 that adverbials (e.g., actually) have a general tendency to undergo subjectification

 andtheyEmbeddings
 shift from objective statements about the world (e.g., “Sorry, the car is
 actually broken”) to subjective statements (e.g., “I can’t believe he actually did that”,
 indicating surprise/disbelief).
 In addition to their ability to learn word meaning from text, embeddings, alas,
 also reproduce the implicit biases and stereotypes that were latent in the text. As
 5.2.2
 the prior Computational
 section just showed, linguistic
 embeddings can studies
 roughly model relational similarity: ‘queen’ as the closest word to ‘king’ - ‘man’ + ‘woman’ implies the analogy
 There are also a number of recent works analyzing semantic change using computational
 man:woman::king:queen. But these same embedding analogies also exhibit gender
 methods.
 stereotypes.[200] Foruse latent semantic
 example Bolukbasianalysis to analyze
 et al. (2016) how the
 find that word meanings
 closest broaden
 occupation
 to ‘computer
 and narrow over programmer’
 time. [113] - ‘man’ + ‘woman’
 use raw in word2vec
 co-occurrence vectorsembeddings
 to perform trained
 a numberon of
 news text is ‘homemaker’, and that the embeddings similarly suggest the
 historical case-studies on semantic change, and [252] perform a similar set of small- analogy
 ‘father’ is to ‘doctor’ as ‘mother’ is to ‘nurse’. This could result in what Crawford
 allocational scale case-studies using temporal topic models. [87] construct point-wise mutual
 harm (2017) and Blodgett et al. (2020) call an allocational harm, when a system alloinformation-based
 cates resources (jobs embeddings and found
 or credit) unfairly that semantic
 to different groups.changes uncovered
 For example by their
 algorithms
 that use had
 method embeddings
 reasonable as agreement
 part of a search for hiring
 with human potential [129]
 judgments. programmers
 and [119]oruse
 doctors
 “neural”
 might thus incorrectly downweight documents with women’s names.
 word-embedding methods to detect linguistic change points. Finally, [257] analyze
 It turns out that embeddings don’t just reflect the statistics of their input, but also
 bias historical co-occurrences to test whether synonyms tend to change in similar ways.
 amplification amplify bias; gendered terms become more gendered in embedding space than they
 were in the input text statistics (Zhao et al. 2017, Ethayarajh et al. 2019b, Jia et al.
 2020), and biases are more exaggerated than in actual labor employment statistics
 (Garg et al., 2018).
 Embeddings also encode the implicit associations that are a property of human
 reasoning. The Implicit Association Test (Greenwald et al., 1998) measures peo-
20 C HAPTER 5 • E MBEDDINGS

 ple’s associations between concepts (like ‘flowers’ or ‘insects’) and attributes (like
 ‘pleasantness’ and ‘unpleasantness’) by measuring differences in the latency with
 which they label words in the various categories.3 Using such methods, people
 in the United States have been shown to associate African-American names with
 unpleasant words (more than European-American names), male names more with
 mathematics and female names with the arts, and old people’s names with unpleasant words (Greenwald et al. 1998, Nosek et al. 2002a, Nosek et al. 2002b). Caliskan
 et al. (2017) replicated all these findings of implicit associations using GloVe vectors
 and cosine similarity instead of human latencies. For example African-American
 names like ‘Leroy’ and ‘Shaniqua’ had a higher GloVe cosine with unpleasant words
 while European-American names (‘Brad’, ‘Greg’, ‘Courtney’) had a higher cosine
 with pleasant words. These problems with embeddings are an example of a reprerepresentational sentational harm (Crawford 2017, Blodgett et al. 2020), which is a harm caused by
 harm
 a system demeaning or even ignoring some social groups. Any embedding-aware algorithm that made use of word sentiment could thus exacerbate bias against African
 Americans.
 Recent research focuses on ways to try to remove these kinds of biases, for
 example by developing a transformation of the embedding space that removes gender stereotypes but preserves definitional gender (Bolukbasi et al. 2016, Zhao et al.
 2017) or changing the training procedure (Zhao et al., 2018). However, although
 debiasing these sorts of debiasing may reduce bias in embeddings, they do not eliminate it
 (Gonen and Goldberg, 2019), and this remains an open problem.
 Historical embeddings are also being used to measure biases in the past. Garg
 et al. (2018) used embeddings from historical texts to measure the association between embeddings for occupations and embeddings for names of various ethnicities or genders (for example the relative cosine similarity of women’s names versus
 men’s to occupation words like ‘librarian’ or ‘carpenter’) across the 20th century.
 They found that the cosines correlate with the empirical historical percentages of
 women or ethnic groups in those occupations. Historical embeddings also replicated old surveys of ethnic stereotypes; the tendency of experimental participants in
 1933 to associate adjectives like ‘industrious’ or ‘superstitious’ with, e.g., Chinese
 ethnicity, correlates with the cosine between Chinese last names and those adjectives
 using embeddings trained on 1930s text. They also were able to document historical
 gender biases, such as the fact that embeddings for adjectives related to competence
 (‘smart’, ‘wise’, ‘thoughtful’, ‘resourceful’) had a higher cosine with male than female words, and showed that this bias has been slowly decreasing since 1960. We
 return in later chapters to this question about the role of bias in natural language
 processing.

 The most important evaluation metric for vector models is extrinsic evaluation on
 tasks, i.e., using vectors in an NLP task and seeing whether this improves performance over some other model.
 3 Roughly speaking, if humans associate ‘flowers’ with ‘pleasantness’ and ‘insects’ with ‘unpleasantness’, when they are instructed to push a green button for ‘flowers’ (daisy, iris, lilac) and ‘pleasant words’
 (love, laughter, pleasure) and a red button for ‘insects’ (flea, spider, mosquito) and ‘unpleasant words’
 (abuse, hatred, ugly) they are faster than in an incongruous condition where they push a red button for
 ‘flowers’ and ‘unpleasant words’ and a green button for ‘insects’ and ‘pleasant words’.
 5.10 • S UMMARY 21

 Nonetheless it is useful to have intrinsic evaluations. The most common metric
 is to test their performance on similarity, computing the correlation between an
 algorithm’s word similarity scores and word similarity ratings assigned by humans.
 WordSim-353 (Finkelstein et al., 2002) is a commonly used set of ratings from 0
 to 10 for 353 noun pairs; for example (plane, car) had an average score of 5.77.
 SimLex-999 (Hill et al., 2015) is a more complex dataset that quantifies similarity
 (cup, mug) rather than relatedness (cup, coffee), and includes concrete and abstract
 adjective, noun and verb pairs. The TOEFL dataset is a set of 80 questions, each
 consisting of a target word with 4 additional word choices; the task is to choose
 which is the correct synonym, as in the example: Levied is closest in meaning to:
 imposed, believed, requested, correlated (Landauer and Dumais, 1997). All of these
 datasets present words without context.
 Slightly more realistic are intrinsic similarity tasks that include context. The
 Stanford Contextual Word Similarity (SCWS) dataset (Huang et al., 2012) and the
 Word-in-Context (WiC) dataset (Pilehvar and Camacho-Collados, 2019) offer richer
 evaluation scenarios. SCWS gives human judgments on 2,003 pairs of words in
 their sentential context, while WiC gives target words in two sentential contexts that
 are either in the same or different senses; see Appendix G. The semantic textual
 similarity task (Agirre et al. 2012, Agirre et al. 2015) evaluates the performance of
 sentence-level similarity algorithms, consisting of a set of pairs of sentences, each
 pair with human-labeled similarity scores.
 Another task used for evaluation is the analogy task, discussed on page 17, where
 the system has to solve problems of the form a is to b as a* is to b*, given a, b, and a*
 and having to find b* (Turney and Littman, 2005). A number of sets of tuples have
 been created for this task (Mikolov et al. 2013a, Mikolov et al. 2013c, Gladkova
 et al. 2016), covering morphology (city:cities::child:children), lexicographic relations (leg:table::spout:teapot) and encyclopedia relations (Beijing:China::Dublin:Ireland),
 some drawing from the SemEval-2012 Task 2 dataset of 79 different relations (Jurgens et al., 2012).
 All embedding algorithms suffer from inherent variability. For example because
 of randomness in the initialization and the random negative sampling, algorithms
 like word2vec may produce different results even from the same dataset, and individual documents in a collection may strongly impact the resulting embeddings
 (Tian et al. 2016, Hellrich and Hahn 2016, Antoniak and Mimno 2018). When embeddings are used to study word associations in particular corpora, therefore, it is
 best practice to train multiple embeddings with bootstrap sampling over documents
 and average the results (Antoniak and Mimno, 2018).

 • In vector semantics, a word is modeled as a vector—a point in high-dimensional
 space, also called an embedding. In this chapter we focus on static embeddings, where each word is mapped to a fixed embedding.
 • Vector semantic models fall into two classes: sparse and dense. In sparse
 models each dimension corresponds to a word in the vocabulary V and cells
 are functions of co-occurrence counts. The word-context or term-term matrix has a row for each (target) word in the vocabulary and a column for each
 context term in the vocabulary.
22 C HAPTER 5 • E MBEDDINGS

 • Dense vector models typically have dimensionality 50–1000. Word2vec algorithms like skip-gram are a popular way to compute dense embeddings.
 Skip-gram trains a logistic regression classifier to compute the probability that
 two words are ‘likely to occur nearby in text’. This probability is computed
 from the dot product between the embeddings for the two words.
 • Skip-gram uses stochastic gradient descent to train the classifier, by learning
 embeddings that have a high dot product with embeddings of words that occur
 nearby and a low dot product with noise words.
 • Other important embedding algorithms include GloVe, a method based on
 ratios of word co-occurrence probabilities.
 • Whether using sparse or dense vectors, word and document similarities are
 computed by some function of the dot product between vectors. The cosine
 of two vectors—a normalized dot product—is the most popular such metric.

Historical Notes
 The idea of vector semantics arose out of research in the 1950s in three distinct
 fields: linguistics, psychology, and computer science, each of which contributed a
 fundamental aspect of the model.
 The idea that meaning is related to the distribution of words in context was
 widespread in linguistic theory of the 1950s, among distributionalists like Zellig
 Harris, Martin Joos, and J. R. Firth, and semioticians like Thomas Sebeok. As Joos
 (1950) put it,
 the linguist’s “meaning” of a morpheme. . . is by definition the set of conditional
 probabilities of its occurrence in context with all other morphemes.
 The idea that the meaning of a word might be modeled as a point in a multidimensional semantic space came from psychologists like Charles E. Osgood, who
 had been studying how people responded to the meaning of words by assigning values along scales like happy/sad or hard/soft. Osgood et al. (1957) proposed that the
 meaning of a word in general could be modeled as a point in a multidimensional
 Euclidean space, and that the similarity of meaning between two words could be
 modeled as the distance between these points in the space.
 A final intellectual source in the 1950s and early 1960s was the field then called
 mechanical
 indexing mechanical indexing, now known as information retrieval. In what became known
 as the vector space model for information retrieval (Salton 1971, Sparck Jones
 1986), researchers demonstrated new ways to define the meaning of words in terms
 of vectors (Switzer, 1965), and refined methods for word similarity based on measures of statistical association between words like mutual information (Giuliano,
 1965) and idf (Sparck Jones, 1972), and showed that the meaning of documents
 could be represented in the same vector spaces used for words. Around the same
 time, (Cordier, 1965) showed that factor analysis of word association probabilities
 could be used to form dense vector representations of words.
 Some of the philosophical underpinning of the distributional way of thinking
 came from the late writings of the philosopher Wittgenstein, who was skeptical of
 the possibility of building a completely formal theory of meaning definitions for
 each word. Wittgenstein suggested instead that “the meaning of a word is its use in
 the language” (Wittgenstein, 1953, PI 43). That is, instead of using some logical language to define each word, or drawing on denotations or truth values, Wittgenstein’s
 H ISTORICAL N OTES 23

 idea is that we should define a word by how it is used by people in speaking and understanding in their day-to-day interactions, thus prefiguring the movement toward
 embodied and experiential models in linguistics and NLP (Glenberg and Robertson
 2000, Lake and Murphy 2021, Bisk et al. 2020, Bender and Koller 2020).
 More distantly related is the idea of defining words by a vector of discrete features, which has roots at least as far back as Descartes and Leibniz (Wierzbicka 1992,
 Wierzbicka 1996). By the middle of the 20th century, beginning with the work of
 Hjelmslev (Hjelmslev, 1969) (originally 1943) and fleshed out in early models of
 generative grammar (Katz and Fodor, 1963), the idea arose of representing meansemantic ing with semantic features, symbols that represent some sort of primitive meaning.
 feature
 For example words like hen, rooster, or chick, have something in common (they all
 describe chickens) and something different (their age and sex), representable as:
 hen +female, +chicken, +adult
 rooster -female, +chicken, +adult
 chick +chicken, -adult
 The dimensions used by vector models of meaning to define words, however, are
 only abstractly related to this idea of a small fixed number of hand-built dimensions.
 Nonetheless, there has been some attempt to show that certain dimensions of embedding models do contribute some specific compositional aspect of meaning like
 these early semantic features.
 The use of dense vectors to model word meaning, and indeed the term embedding, grew out of the latent semantic indexing (LSI) model (Deerwester et al.,
 1988) recast as LSA (latent semantic analysis) (Deerwester et al., 1990). In LSA
 SVD singular value decomposition—SVD— is applied to a term-document matrix (each
 cell weighted by log frequency and normalized by entropy), and then the first 300
 dimensions are used as the LSA embedding. Singular Value Decomposition (SVD)
 is a method for finding the most important dimensions of a data set, those dimensions along which the data varies the most. LSA was then quickly widely applied:
 as a cognitive model (Landauer and Dumais, 1997), and for tasks like spell checking
 (Jones and Martin, 1997), language modeling (Bellegarda 1997, Coccaro and Jurafsky 1998, Bellegarda 2000), morphology induction (Schone and Jurafsky 2000,
 Schone and Jurafsky 2001b), multiword expressions (MWEs) (Schone and Jurafsky,
 2001a), and essay grading (Rehder et al., 1998). Related models were simultaneously developed and applied to word sense disambiguation by Schütze (1992). LSA
 also led to the earliest use of embeddings to represent words in a probabilistic classifier, in the logistic regression document router of Schütze et al. (1995). The idea of
 SVD on the term-term matrix (rather than the term-document matrix) as a model of
 meaning for NLP was proposed soon after LSA by Schütze (1992). Schütze applied
 the low-rank (97-dimensional) embeddings produced by SVD to the task of word
 sense disambiguation, analyzed the resulting semantic space, and also suggested
 possible techniques like dropping high-order dimensions. See Schütze (1997).
 A number of alternative matrix models followed on from the early SVD work,
 including Probabilistic Latent Semantic Indexing (PLSI) (Hofmann, 1999), Latent
 Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) (Blei et al., 2003), and Non-negative Matrix Factorization (NMF) (Lee and Seung, 1999).
 The LSA community seems to have first used the word “embedding” in Landauer
 et al. (1997), in a variant of its mathematical meaning as a mapping from one space
 or mathematical structure to another. In LSA, the word embedding seems to have
 described the mapping from the space of sparse count vectors to the latent space of
 SVD dense vectors. Although the word thus originally meant the mapping from one
24 C HAPTER 5 • E MBEDDINGS

 space to another, it has metonymically shifted to mean the resulting dense vector in
 the latent space, and it is in this sense that we currently use the word.
 By the next decade, Bengio et al. (2003) and Bengio et al. (2006) showed that
 neural language models could also be used to develop embeddings as part of the task
 of word prediction. Collobert and Weston (2007), Collobert and Weston (2008), and
 Collobert et al. (2011) then demonstrated that embeddings could be used to represent
 word meanings for a number of NLP tasks. Turian et al. (2010) compared the value
 of different kinds of embeddings for different NLP tasks. Mikolov et al. (2011)
 showed that recurrent neural nets could be used as language models. The idea of
 simplifying the hidden layer of these neural net language models to create the skipgram (and also CBOW) algorithms was proposed by Mikolov et al. (2013a). The
 negative sampling training algorithm was proposed in Mikolov et al. (2013b). There
 are numerous surveys of static embeddings and their parameterizations (Bullinaria
 and Levy 2007, Bullinaria and Levy 2012, Lapesa and Evert 2014, Kiela and Clark
 2014, Levy et al. 2015).
 See Manning et al. (2008) and Chapter 11 for a deeper understanding of the role
 of vectors in information retrieval, including how to compare queries with documents, more details on tf-idf, and issues of scaling to very large datasets. See Kim
 (2019) for a clear and comprehensive tutorial on word2vec. Cruse (2004) is a useful
 introductory linguistic text on lexical semantics.

Exercises
 Exercises 25

Agirre, E., C. Banea, C. Cardie, D. Cer, M. Diab, Carlson, G. N. 1977. Reference to kinds in English. Ph.D.
 A. Gonzalez-Agirre, W. Guo, I. Lopez-Gazpio, M. Mar- thesis, University of Massachusetts, Amherst. Forward.
 itxalar, R. Mihalcea, G. Rigau, L. Uria, and J. Wiebe. Clark, E. 1987. The principle of contrast: A constraint on
 2015. SemEval-2015 task 2: Semantic textual similarity, language acquisition. In B. MacWhinney, ed., Mecha-
English, Spanish and pilot on interpretability. SemEval- nisms of language acquisition, 1–33. LEA.
 15.
 Coccaro, N. and D. Jurafsky. 1998. Towards better integra-
Agirre, E., M. Diab, D. Cer, and A. Gonzalez-Agirre. 2012. tion of semantic predictors in statistical language model-
SemEval-2012 task 6: A pilot on semantic textual simi- ing. ICSLP.
 larity. SemEval-12.
 Collobert, R. and J. Weston. 2007. Fast semantic extraction
Antoniak, M. and D. Mimno. 2018. Evaluating the stability
 using a novel neural network architecture. ACL.
 of embedding-based word similarities. TACL, 6:107–119.
 Collobert, R. and J. Weston. 2008. A unified architecture for
Bellegarda, J. R. 1997. A latent semantic analysis framework
 natural language processing: Deep neural networks with
 for large-span language modeling. EUROSPEECH.
 multitask learning. ICML.
Bellegarda, J. R. 2000. Exploiting latent semantic information in statistical language modeling. Proceedings of the Collobert, R., J. Weston, L. Bottou, M. Karlen,
 IEEE, 89(8):1279–1296. K. Kavukcuoglu, and P. Kuksa. 2011. Natural language
 processing (almost) from scratch. JMLR, 12:2493–2537.
Bender, E. M. and A. Koller. 2020. Climbing towards NLU:
 On meaning, form, and understanding in the age of data. Cordier, B. 1965. Factor-analysis of correspondences. COL-
ACL. ING 1965.
Bengio, Y., A. Courville, and P. Vincent. 2013. Represen- Crawford, K. 2017. The trouble with bias. Keynote at
 tation learning: A review and new perspectives. IEEE NeurIPS.
 Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelli- Cruse, D. A. 2004. Meaning in Language: an Introduction
 gence, 35(8):1798–1828. to Semantics and Pragmatics. Oxford University Press.
Bengio, Y., R. Ducharme, P. Vincent, and C. Jauvin. 2003. Second edition.
 A neural probabilistic language model. JMLR, 3:1137– Davies, M. 2012. Expanding horizons in historical lin-
1155. guistics with the 400-million word Corpus of Historical
Bengio, Y., H. Schwenk, J.-S. Senécal, F. Morin, and J.-L. American English. Corpora, 7(2):121–157.
 Gauvain. 2006. Neural probabilistic language models. In Davies, M. 2015. The Wikipedia Corpus: 4.6 million arti-
Innovations in Machine Learning, 137–186. Springer. cles, 1.9 billion words. Adapted from Wikipedia. https:
Bisk, Y., A. Holtzman, J. Thomason, J. Andreas, Y. Bengio, //www.english-corpora.org/wiki/.
 J. Chai, M. Lapata, A. Lazaridou, J. May, A. Nisnevich, Deerwester, S. C., S. T. Dumais, G. W. Furnas, R. A. Harsh-
N. Pinto, and J. Turian. 2020. Experience grounds lan- man, T. K. Landauer, K. E. Lochbaum, and L. Streeter.
 guage. EMNLP. 1988. Computer information retrieval using latent seman-
Blei, D. M., A. Y. Ng, and M. I. Jordan. 2003. Latent Dirich- tic structure: US Patent 4,839,853.
 let allocation. JMLR, 3(5):993–1022. Deerwester, S. C., S. T. Dumais, T. K. Landauer, G. W. Fur-
Blodgett, S. L., S. Barocas, H. Daumé III, and H. Wallach. nas, and R. A. Harshman. 1990. Indexing by latent se-
2020. Language (technology) is power: A critical survey mantics analysis. JASIS, 41(6):391–407.
 of “bias” in NLP. ACL.
 Ethayarajh, K., D. Duvenaud, and G. Hirst. 2019a. Towards
Bojanowski, P., E. Grave, A. Joulin, and T. Mikolov. 2017. understanding linear word analogies. ACL.
 Enriching word vectors with subword information. TACL,
 Ethayarajh, K., D. Duvenaud, and G. Hirst. 2019b. Under-
5:135–146.
 standing undesirable word embedding associations. ACL.
Bolukbasi, T., K.-W. Chang, J. Zou, V. Saligrama, and A. T.
 Kalai. 2016. Man is to computer programmer as woman Finkelstein, L., E. Gabrilovich, Y. Matias, E. Rivlin,
 is to homemaker? Debiasing word embeddings. NeurIPS. Z. Solan, G. Wolfman, and E. Ruppin. 2002. Placing
 search in context: The concept revisited. ACM Trans-
Bréal, M. 1897. Essai de Sémantique: Science des significa- actions on Information Systems, 20(1):116—-131.
 tions. Hachette.
 Firth, J. R. 1957. A synopsis of linguistic theory 1930–
Budanitsky, A. and G. Hirst. 2006. Evaluating WordNet-
1955. In Studies in Linguistic Analysis. Philological Sobased measures of lexical semantic relatedness. Compuciety. Reprinted in Palmer, F. (ed.) 1968. Selected Papers
 tational Linguistics, 32(1):13–47.
 of J. R. Firth. Longman, Harlow.
Bullinaria, J. A. and J. P. Levy. 2007. Extracting seman-
Garg, N., L. Schiebinger, D. Jurafsky, and J. Zou. 2018.
 tic representations from word co-occurrence statistics:
 Word embeddings quantify 100 years of gender and eth-
A computational study. Behavior research methods,
 nic stereotypes. Proceedings of the National Academy of
 39(3):510–526.
 Sciences, 115(16):E3635–E3644.
Bullinaria, J. A. and J. P. Levy. 2012. Extracting semantic
 representations from word co-occurrence statistics: stop- Girard, G. 1718. La justesse de la langue françoise: ou les
 lists, stemming, and SVD. Behavior research methods, différentes significations des mots qui passent pour syn-
44(3):890–907. onimes. Laurent d’Houry, Paris.
Caliskan, A., J. J. Bryson, and A. Narayanan. 2017. Semantics derived automatically from language corpora contain
 human-like biases. Science, 356(6334):183–186.
26 Chapter 5 • Embeddings

Giuliano, V. E. 1965. The interpretation of word Kim, E. 2019. Optimize computational efficiency
 associations. Statistical Association Methods For of skip-gram with negative sampling. https://
 Mechanized Documentation. Symposium Proceed- aegis4048.github.io/optimize_computational_
 ings. Washington, D.C., USA, March 17, 1964. efficiency_of_skip-gram_with_negative_
 https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/Legacy/ sampling.
 MP/nbsmiscellaneouspub269.pdf. Lake, B. M. and G. L. Murphy. 2021. Word meaning in
Gladkova, A., A. Drozd, and S. Matsuoka. 2016. Analogy- minds and machines. Psychological Review. In press.
 based detection of morphological and semantic relations Landauer, T. K. and S. T. Dumais. 1997. A solution to Plato’s
 with word embeddings: what works and what doesn’t. problem: The Latent Semantic Analysis theory of acqui-
NAACL Student Research Workshop. sition, induction, and representation of knowledge. Psy-
Glenberg, A. M. and D. A. Robertson. 2000. Symbol ground- chological Review, 104:211–240.
 ing and meaning: A comparison of high-dimensional and Landauer, T. K., D. Laham, B. Rehder, and M. E. Schreiner.
 embodied theories of meaning. Journal of memory and 1997. How well can passage meaning be derived withlanguage, 43(3):379–401. out using word order? A comparison of Latent Semantic
Gonen, H. and Y. Goldberg. 2019. Lipstick on a pig: Debi- Analysis and humans. COGSCI.
 asing methods cover up systematic gender biases in word Lapesa, G. and S. Evert. 2014. A large scale evaluation of
 embeddings but do not remove them. NAACL HLT. distributional semantic models: Parameters, interactions
Gould, S. J. 1980. The Panda’s Thumb. Penguin Group. and model selection. TACL, 2:531–545.
Greenwald, A. G., D. E. McGhee, and J. L. K. Schwartz. Lee, D. D. and H. S. Seung. 1999. Learning the parts of
 1998. Measuring individual differences in implicit cogni- objects by non-negative matrix factorization. Nature,
 tion: the implicit association test. Journal of personality 401(6755):788–791.
 and social psychology, 74(6):1464–1480. Levy, O. and Y. Goldberg. 2014a. Dependency-based word
Hamilton, W. L., J. Leskovec, and D. Jurafsky. 2016. Di- embeddings. ACL.
 achronic word embeddings reveal statistical laws of se- Levy, O. and Y. Goldberg. 2014b. Linguistic regularities in
 mantic change. ACL. sparse and explicit word representations. CoNLL.
Harris, Z. S. 1954. Distributional structure. Word, 10:146– Levy, O. and Y. Goldberg. 2014c. Neural word embedding
 162. as implicit matrix factorization. NeurIPS.
Hellrich, J. and U. Hahn. 2016. Bad company— Levy, O., Y. Goldberg, and I. Dagan. 2015. Improving dis-
Neighborhoods in neural embedding spaces considered tributional similarity with lessons learned from word emharmful. COLING. beddings. TACL, 3:211–225.
Hill, F., R. Reichart, and A. Korhonen. 2015. Simlex-999: Lin, Y., J.-B. Michel, E. Lieberman Aiden, J. Orwant,
 Evaluating semantic models with (genuine) similarity es- W. Brockman, and S. Petrov. 2012. Syntactic annotations
 timation. Computational Linguistics, 41(4):665–695. for the Google Books NGram corpus. ACL.
Hjelmslev, L. 1969. Prologomena to a Theory of Language. Linzen, T. 2016. Issues in evaluating semantic spaces us-
University of Wisconsin Press. Translated by Francis J. ing word analogies. 1st Workshop on Evaluating Vector-
Whitfield; original Danish edition 1943. Space Representations for NLP.
Hofmann, T. 1999. Probabilistic latent semantic indexing. Manning, C. D., P. Raghavan, and H. Schütze. 2008. Intro-
SIGIR-99. duction to Information Retrieval. Cambridge.
Huang, E. H., R. Socher, C. D. Manning, and A. Y. Ng. 2012. Mikolov, T., K. Chen, G. S. Corrado, and J. Dean. 2013a. Ef-
Improving word representations via global context and ficient estimation of word representations in vector space.
 multiple word prototypes. ACL. ICLR 2013.
Jia, S., T. Meng, J. Zhao, and K.-W. Chang. 2020. Mitigat- Mikolov, T., S. Kombrink, L. Burget, J. H. Černockỳ, and
 ing gender bias amplification in distribution by posterior S. Khudanpur. 2011. Extensions of recurrent neural netregularization. ACL. work language model. ICASSP.
Jones, M. P. and J. H. Martin. 1997. Contextual spelling cor- Mikolov, T., I. Sutskever, K. Chen, G. S. Corrado, and
 rection using latent semantic analysis. ANLP. J. Dean. 2013b. Distributed representations of words and
 phrases and their compositionality. NeurIPS.
Joos, M. 1950. Description of language design. JASA,
 22:701–708. Mikolov, T., W.-t. Yih, and G. Zweig. 2013c. Linguistic regularities in continuous space word representations.
Jurgens, D., S. M. Mohammad, P. Turney, and K. Holyoak. NAACL HLT.
 2012. SemEval-2012 task 2: Measuring degrees of rela-
Nosek, B. A., M. R. Banaji, and A. G. Greenwald. 2002a.
 tional similarity. *SEM 2012.
 Harvesting implicit group attitudes and beliefs from a
Katz, J. J. and J. A. Fodor. 1963. The structure of a semantic demonstration web site. Group Dynamics: Theory, Retheory. Language, 39:170–210. search, and Practice, 6(1):101.
Kiela, D. and S. Clark. 2014. A systematic study of semantic Nosek, B. A., M. R. Banaji, and A. G. Greenwald. 2002b.
 vector space model parameters. EACL 2nd Workshop on Math=male, me=female, therefore math6= me. Journal of
 Continuous Vector Space Models and their Composition- personality and social psychology, 83(1):44.
 ality (CVSC).
 Osgood, C. E., G. J. Suci, and P. H. Tannenbaum. 1957. The
 Measurement of Meaning. University of Illinois Press.
 Exercises 27

Pennington, J., R. Socher, and C. D. Manning. 2014. GloVe: Turney, P. D. and M. L. Littman. 2005. Corpus-based learn-
Global vectors for word representation. EMNLP. ing of analogies and semantic relations. Machine Learn-
Peterson, J. C., D. Chen, and T. L. Griffiths. 2020. Parallelo- ing, 60(1-3):251–278.
 grams revisited: Exploring the limitations of vector space van der Maaten, L. and G. E. Hinton. 2008. Visualizing highmodels for simple analogies. Cognition, 205. dimensional data using t-SNE. JMLR, 9:2579–2605.
Pilehvar, M. T. and J. Camacho-Collados. 2019. WiC: the Wierzbicka, A. 1992. Semantics, Culture, and Cognition:
 word-in-context dataset for evaluating context-sensitive University Human Concepts in Culture-Specific Configumeaning representations. NAACL HLT. rations. Oxford University Press.
Rehder, B., M. E. Schreiner, M. B. W. Wolfe, D. Laham, Wierzbicka, A. 1996. Semantics: Primes and Universals.
 T. K. Landauer, and W. Kintsch. 1998. Using Latent Oxford University Press.
 Semantic Analysis to assess knowledge: Some technical Wittgenstein, L. 1953. Philosophical Investigations. (Transconsiderations. Discourse Processes, 25(2-3):337–354. lated by Anscombe, G.E.M.). Blackwell.
Rohde, D. L. T., L. M. Gonnerman, and D. C. Plaut. 2006. Zhao, J., T. Wang, M. Yatskar, V. Ordonez, and K.-
 An improved model of semantic similarity based on lexi- W. Chang. 2017. Men also like shopping: Reducing
 cal co-occurrence. CACM, 8:627–633. gender bias amplification using corpus-level constraints.
Rumelhart, D. E. and A. A. Abrahamson. 1973. A model for EMNLP.
 analogical reasoning. Cognitive Psychology, 5(1):1–28. Zhao, J., Y. Zhou, Z. Li, W. Wang, and K.-W. Chang. 2018.
Salton, G. 1971. The SMART Retrieval System: Experiments Learning gender-neutral word embeddings. EMNLP.
 in Automatic Document Processing. Prentice Hall.
Schluter, N. 2018. The word analogy testing caveat. NAACL
 HLT.
Schone, P. and D. Jurafsky. 2000. Knowlege-free induction
 of morphology using latent semantic analysis. CoNLL.
Schone, P. and D. Jurafsky. 2001a. Is knowledge-free induction of multiword unit dictionary headwords a solved
 problem? EMNLP.
Schone, P. and D. Jurafsky. 2001b. Knowledge-free induction of inflectional morphologies. NAACL.
Schütze, H. 1992. Dimensions of meaning. Proceedings of
 Supercomputing ’92. IEEE Press.
Schütze, H. 1997. Ambiguity Resolution in Language Learning – Computational and Cognitive Models. CSLI, Stanford, CA.
Schütze, H., D. A. Hull, and J. Pedersen. 1995. A comparison of classifiers and document representations for the
 routing problem. SIGIR-95.
Schütze, H. and J. Pedersen. 1993. A vector model for syntagmatic and paradigmatic relatedness. 9th Annual Conference of the UW Centre for the New OED and Text Research.
Sparck Jones, K. 1972. A statistical interpretation of term
 specificity and its application in retrieval. Journal of Documentation, 28(1):11–21.
Sparck Jones, K. 1986. Synonymy and Semantic Classification. Edinburgh University Press, Edinburgh. Republication of 1964 PhD Thesis.
Switzer, P. 1965. Vector images in document retrieval.
 Statistical Association Methods For Mechanized Documentation. Symposium Proceedings. Washington, D.C.,
 USA, March 17, 1964. https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/
 nistpubs/Legacy/MP/nbsmiscellaneouspub269.
 pdf.
Tian, Y., V. Kulkarni, B. Perozzi, and S. Skiena. 2016. On
 the convergent properties of word embedding methods.
 ArXiv preprint arXiv:1605.03956.
Turian, J., L. Ratinov, and Y. Bengio. 2010. Word representations: a simple and general method for semi-supervised
 learning. ACL.
