rights reserved. Draft of August 24, 2025.

CHAPTER

 Word Senses and WordNet
I Lady Bracknell. Are your parents living?
 Jack. I have lost both my parents.
 Lady Bracknell. To lose one parent, Mr. Worthing, may be regarded as a
 misfortune; to lose both looks like carelessness.
 Oscar Wilde, The Importance of Being Earnest

 ambiguous Words are ambiguous: the same word can be used to mean different things. In
 Chapter 5 we saw that the word “mouse” has (at least) two meanings: (1) a small
 rodent, or (2) a hand-operated device to control a cursor. The word “bank” can
 mean: (1) a financial institution or (2) a sloping mound. In the quote above from
 his play The Importance of Being Earnest, Oscar Wilde plays with two meanings of
 “lose” (to misplace an object, and to suffer the death of a close person).
 We say that the words ‘mouse’ or ‘bank’ are polysemous (from Greek ‘having
 word sense many senses’, poly- ‘many’ + sema, ‘sign, mark’).1 A sense (or word sense) is
 a discrete representation of one aspect of the meaning of a word. In this chapter
 WordNet we discuss word senses in more detail and introduce WordNet, a large online thesaurus —a database that represents word senses—with versions in many languages.
 WordNet also represents relations between senses. For example, there is an IS-A
 relation between dog and mammal (a dog is a kind of mammal) and a part-whole
 relation between engine and car (an engine is a part of a car).
 Knowing the relation between two senses can play an important role in tasks
 involving meaning. Consider the antonymy relation. Two words are antonyms if
 they have opposite meanings, like long and short, or up and down. Distinguishing
 these is quite important; if a user asks a dialogue agent to turn up the music, it
 would be unfortunate to instead turn it down. But in fact in embedding models like
 word2vec, antonyms are easily confused with each other, because often one of the
 closest words in embedding space to a word (e.g., up) is its antonym (e.g., down).
 Thesauruses that represent this relationship can help!
 word sense
disambiguation We also introduce word sense disambiguation (WSD), the task of determining
 which sense of a word is being used in a particular context. We’ll give supervised
 and unsupervised algorithms for deciding which sense was intended in a particular
 context. This task has a very long history in computational linguistics and many applications. In question answering, we can be more helpful to a user who asks about
 “bat care” if we know which sense of bat is relevant. (Is the user a vampire? or
 just wants to play baseball.) And the different senses of a word often have different translations; in Spanish the animal bat is a murciélago while the baseball bat is
 a bate, and indeed word sense algorithms may help improve MT (Pu et al., 2018).
 Finally, WSD has long been used as a tool for evaluating language processing models, and understanding how models represent different word senses is an important
 1 The word polysemy itself is ambiguous; you may see it used in a different way, to refer only to cases
 where a word’s senses are related in some structured way, reserving the word homonymy to mean sense
 ambiguities with no relation between the senses (Haber and Poesio, 2020). Here we will use ‘polysemy’
 to mean any kind of sense ambiguity, and ‘structured polysemy’ for polysemy with sense relations.
2 A PPENDIX I • W ORD S ENSES AND W ORD N ET

 analytic direction.

I.1 Word Senses
 word sense A sense (or word sense) is a discrete representation of one aspect of the meaning of
 a word. Loosely following lexicographic tradition, we represent each sense with a
 superscript: bank1 and bank2 , mouse1 and mouse2 . In context, it’s easy to see the
 different meanings:
 mouse1 : .... a mouse controlling a computer system in 1968.
 mouse2 : .... a quiet animal like a mouse
 bank1 : ...a bank can hold the investments in a custodial account ...
 bank2 : ...as agriculture burgeons on the east bank, the river ...

 I.1.1 Defining Word Senses
 How can we define the meaning of a word sense? We introduced in Chapter 5 the
 standard computational approach of representing a word as an embedding, a point
 in semantic space. The intuition of embedding models like word2vec or GloVe is
 that the meaning of a word can be defined by its co-occurrences, the counts of words
 that often occur nearby. But that doesn’t tell us how to define the meaning of a word
 sense. As we saw in Chapter 10, contextual embeddings like BERT go further by
 offering an embedding that represents the meaning of a word in its textual context,
 and we’ll see that contextual embeddings lie at the heart of modern algorithms for
 word sense disambiguation.
 But first, we need to consider the alternative ways that dictionaries and thesauruses offer for defining senses. One is based on the fact that dictionaries or thegloss sauruses give textual definitions for each sense called glosses. Here are the glosses
 for two senses of bank:
 1. financial institution that accepts deposits and channels
 the money into lending activities
 2. sloping land (especially the slope beside a body of water)

 Glosses are not a formal meaning representation; they are just written for people.
 Consider the following fragments from the definitions of right, left, red, and blood
 from the American Heritage Dictionary (Morris, 1985).

 right adj. located nearer the right hand esp. being on the right when
 facing the same direction as the observer.
 left adj. located nearer to this side of the body than the right.
 red n. the color of blood or a ruby.
 blood n. the red liquid that circulates in the heart, arteries and veins of
 animals.

 Note the circularity in these definitions. The definition of right makes two direct
 references to itself, and the entry for left contains an implicit self-reference in the
 phrase this side of the body, which presumably means the left side. The entries for
 red and blood reference each other in their definitions. For humans, such entries are
 useful since the user of the dictionary has sufficient grasp of these other terms.
 I.1 • W ORD S ENSES 3

 Yet despite their circularity and lack of formal representation, glosses can still
 be useful for computational modeling of senses. This is because a gloss is just a sentence, and from sentences we can compute sentence embeddings that tell us something about the meaning of the sense. Dictionaries often give example sentences
 along with glosses, and these can again be used to help build a sense representation.
 The second way that thesauruses offer for defining a sense is—like the dictionary
 definitions—defining a sense through its relationship with other senses. For example, the above definitions make it clear that right and left are similar kinds of lemmas
 that stand in some kind of alternation, or opposition, to one another. Similarly, we
 can glean that red is a color and that blood is a liquid. Sense relations of this sort
 (IS-A, or antonymy) are explicitly listed in on-line databases like WordNet. Given
 a sufficiently large database of such relations, many applications are quite capable
 of performing sophisticated semantic tasks about word senses (even if they do not
 really know their right from their left).

 I.1.2 How many senses do words have?
 Dictionaries and thesauruses give discrete lists of senses. By contrast, embeddings
 (whether static or contextual) offer a continuous high-dimensional model of meaning
 that doesn’t divide up into discrete senses.
 Therefore creating a thesaurus depends on criteria for deciding when the differing uses of a word should be represented with discrete senses. We might consider
 two senses discrete if they have independent truth conditions, different syntactic behavior, and independent sense relations, or if they exhibit antagonistic meanings.
 Consider the following uses of the verb serve from the WSJ corpus:
 (I.1) They rarely serve red meat, preferring to prepare seafood.
 (I.2) He served as U.S. ambassador to Norway in 1976 and 1977.
 (I.3) He might have served his time, come out and led an upstanding life.
 The serve of serving red meat and that of serving time clearly have different truth
 conditions and presuppositions; the serve of serve as ambassador has the distinct
 subcategorization structure serve as NP. These heuristics suggest that these are probably three distinct senses of serve. One practical technique for determining if two
 senses are distinct is to conjoin two uses of a word in a single sentence; this kind
zeugma of conjunction of antagonistic readings is called zeugma. Consider the following
 examples:
 (I.4) Which of those flights serve breakfast?
 (I.5) Does Air France serve Philadelphia?
 (I.6) ?Does Air France serve breakfast and Philadelphia?
 We use (?) to mark those examples that are semantically ill-formed. The oddness of
 the invented third example (a case of zeugma) indicates there is no sensible way to
 make a single sense of serve work for both breakfast and Philadelphia. We can use
 this as evidence that serve has two different senses in this case.
 Dictionaries tend to use many fine-grained senses so as to capture subtle meaning
 differences, a reasonable approach given that the traditional role of dictionaries is
 aiding word learners. For computational purposes, we often don’t need these fine
 distinctions, so we often group or cluster the senses; we have already done this for
 some of the examples in this chapter. Indeed, clustering examples into senses, or
 senses into broader-grained categories, is an important computational task that we’ll
 discuss in Section I.7.
4 A PPENDIX I • W ORD S ENSES AND W ORD N ET

I.2 Relations Between Senses
 This section explores the relations between word senses, especially those that have
 received significant computational investigation like synonymy, antonymy, and hypernymy.

 Synonymy
 We introduced in Chapter 5 the idea that when two senses of two different words
 synonym (lemmas) are identical, or nearly identical, we say the two senses are synonyms.
 Synonyms include such pairs as
 couch/sofa vomit/throw up filbert/hazelnut car/automobile
 And we mentioned that in practice, the word synonym is commonly used to
 describe a relationship of approximate or rough synonymy. But furthermore, synonymy is actually a relationship between senses rather than words. Considering the
 words big and large. These may seem to be synonyms in the following sentences,
 since we could swap big and large in either sentence and retain the same meaning:
 (I.7) How big is that plane?
 (I.8) Would I be flying on a large or small plane?
 But note the following sentence in which we cannot substitute large for big:
 (I.9) Miss Nelson, for instance, became a kind of big sister to Benjamin.
 (I.10) ?Miss Nelson, for instance, became a kind of large sister to Benjamin.
 This is because the word big has a sense that means being older or grown up, while
 large lacks this sense. Thus, we say that some senses of big and large are (nearly)
 synonymous while other ones are not.

 Antonymy
 antonym Whereas synonyms are words with identical or similar meanings, antonyms are
 words with an opposite meaning, like:
 long/short big/little fast/slow cold/hot dark/light
 rise/fall up/down in/out
 Two senses can be antonyms if they define a binary opposition or are at opposite
 ends of some scale. This is the case for long/short, fast/slow, or big/little, which are
 reversives at opposite ends of the length or size scale. Another group of antonyms, reversives,
 describe change or movement in opposite directions, such as rise/fall or up/down.
 Antonyms thus differ completely with respect to one aspect of their meaning—
 their position on a scale or their direction—but are otherwise very similar, sharing
 almost all other aspects of meaning. Thus, automatically distinguishing synonyms
 from antonyms can be difficult.

 Taxonomic Relations
 Another way word senses can be related is taxonomically. A word (or sense) is a
 hyponym hyponym of another word or sense if the first is more specific, denoting a subclass
 of the other. For example, car is a hyponym of vehicle, dog is a hyponym of animal,
 hypernym and mango is a hyponym of fruit. Conversely, we say that vehicle is a hypernym of
 car, and animal is a hypernym of dog. It is unfortunate that the two words (hypernym
 I.2 • R ELATIONS B ETWEEN S ENSES 5

 and hyponym) are very similar and hence easily confused; for this reason, the word
superordinate superordinate is often used instead of hypernym.

 Superordinate vehicle fruit furniture mammal
 Subordinate car mango chair dog

 We can define hypernymy more formally by saying that the class denoted by
 the superordinate extensionally includes the class denoted by the hyponym. Thus,
 the class of animals includes as members all dogs, and the class of moving actions
 includes all walking actions. Hypernymy can also be defined in terms of entailment. Under this definition, a sense A is a hyponym of a sense B if everything
 that is A is also B, and hence being an A entails being a B, or ∀x A(x) ⇒ B(x). Hyponymy/hypernymy is usually a transitive relation; if A is a hyponym of B and B is a
 hyponym of C, then A is a hyponym of C. Another name for the hypernym/hyponym
 IS-A structure is the IS-A hierarchy, in which we say A IS-A B, or B subsumes A.
 Hypernymy is useful for tasks like textual entailment or question answering;
 knowing that leukemia is a type of cancer, for example, would certainly be useful in
 answering questions about leukemia.

 Meronymy
 part-whole Another common relation is meronymy, the part-whole relation. A leg is part of a
 chair; a wheel is part of a car. We say that wheel is a meronym of car, and car is a
 holonym of wheel.

 Structured Polysemy
 The senses of a word can also be related semantically, in which case we call the
 structured
 polysemy relationship between them structured polysemy. Consider this sense bank:
 (I.11) The bank is on the corner of Nassau and Witherspoon.
 This sense, perhaps bank4 , means something like “the building belonging to
 a financial institution”. These two kinds of senses (an organization and the building associated with an organization ) occur together for many other words as well
 (school, university, hospital, etc.). Thus, there is a systematic relationship between
 senses that we might represent as
 BUILDING ↔ ORGANIZATION
 metonymy This particular subtype of polysemy relation is called metonymy. Metonymy is
 the use of one aspect of a concept or entity to refer to other aspects of the entity or
 to the entity itself. We are performing metonymy when we use the phrase the White
 House to refer to the administration whose office is in the White House. Other
 common examples of metonymy include the relation between the following pairings
 of senses:
 AUTHOR ↔ WORKS OF AUTHOR
 (Jane Austen wrote Emma) (I really love Jane Austen)
 FRUITTREE ↔ FRUIT
 (Plums have beautiful blossoms) (I ate a preserved plum yesterday)
6 A PPENDIX I • W ORD S ENSES AND W ORD N ET

I.3 WordNet: A Database of Lexical Relations
 The most commonly used resource for sense relations in English and many other
 WordNet languages is the WordNet lexical database (Fellbaum, 1998). English WordNet
 consists of three separate databases, one each for nouns and verbs and a third for
 adjectives and adverbs; closed class words are not included. Each database contains
 a set of lemmas, each one annotated with a set of senses. The WordNet 3.0 release
 has 117,798 nouns, 11,529 verbs, 22,479 adjectives, and 4,481 adverbs. The average noun has 1.23 senses, and the average verb has 2.16 senses. WordNet can be
 accessed on the Web or downloaded locally. Figure I.1 shows the lemma entry for
 the noun bass.

 The noun “bass” has 8 senses in WordNet.
 1. bass1 - (the lowest part of the musical range)
 2. bass2 , bass part1 - (the lowest part in polyphonic music)
 3. bass3 , basso1 - (an adult male singer with the lowest voice)
 4. sea bass1 , bass4 - (the lean flesh of a saltwater fish of the family Serranidae)
 5. freshwater bass1 , bass5 - (any of various North American freshwater fish with
 lean flesh (especially of the genus Micropterus))
 6. bass6 , bass voice1 , basso2 - (the lowest adult male singing voice)
 7. bass7 - (the member with the lowest range of a family of musical instruments)
 8. bass8 - (nontechnical name for any of numerous edible marine and
 freshwater spiny-finned fishes)

 Figure I.1 A portion of the WordNet 3.0 entry for the noun bass.

 gloss Note that there are eight senses, each of which has a gloss (a dictionary-style
 definition), a list of synonyms for the sense, and sometimes also usage examples.
 WordNet doesn’t represent pronunciation, so doesn’t distinguish the pronunciation
 [b ae s] in bass4 , bass5 , and bass8 from the other senses pronounced [b ey s].
 synset The set of near-synonyms for a WordNet sense is called a synset (for synonym
 set); synsets are an important primitive in WordNet. The entry for bass includes
 synsets like {bass1 , deep6 }, or {bass6 , bass voice1 , basso2 }. We can think of a
 synset as representing a concept of the type we discussed in Appendix F. Thus,
 instead of representing concepts in logical terms, WordNet represents them as lists
 of the word senses that can be used to express the concept. Here’s another synset
 example:
 {chump1 , fool2 , gull1 , mark9 , patsy1 , fall guy1 ,
 sucker1 , soft touch1 , mug2 }
 The gloss of this synset describes it as:
 Gloss: a person who is gullible and easy to take advantage of.
 Glosses are properties of a synset, so that each sense included in the synset has the
 same gloss and can express this concept. Because they share glosses, synsets like
 this one are the fundamental unit associated with WordNet entries, and hence it is
 synsets, not wordforms, lemmas, or individual senses, that participate in most of the
 lexical sense relations in WordNet.
 WordNet also labels each synset with a lexicographic category drawn from a
 semantic field for example the 26 categories for nouns shown in Fig. I.2, as well as
 15 for verbs (plus 2 for adjectives and 1 for adverbs). These categories are often
 I.3 • W ORD N ET: A DATABASE OF L EXICAL R ELATIONS 7

 supersense called supersenses, because they act as coarse semantic categories or groupings of
 senses which can be useful when word senses are too fine-grained (Ciaramita and
 Johnson 2003, Ciaramita and Altun 2006). Supersenses have also been defined for
 adjectives (Tsvetkov et al., 2014) and prepositions (Schneider et al., 2018).

Category Example Category Example Category Example
ACT service GROUP place PLANT tree
ANIMAL dog LOCATION area POSSESSION price
ARTIFACT car MOTIVE reason PROCESS process
ATTRIBUTE quality NATURAL EVENT experience QUANTITY amount
BODY hair NATURAL OBJECT flower RELATION portion
COGNITION way OTHER stuff SHAPE square
COMMUNICATION review PERSON people STATE pain
FEELING discomfort PHENOMENON result SUBSTANCE oil
FOOD food TIME day
Figure I.2 Supersenses: 26 lexicographic categories for nouns in WordNet.

 I.3.1 Sense Relations in WordNet
 WordNet represents all the kinds of sense relations discussed in the previous section,
 as illustrated in Fig. I.3 and Fig. I.4.

Relation Also Called Definition Example
Hypernym Superordinate From concepts to superordinates breakfast1 → meal1
Hyponym Subordinate From concepts to subtypes meal1 → lunch1
Instance Hypernym Instance From instances to their concepts Austen1 → author1
Instance Hyponym Has-Instance From concepts to their instances composer1 → Bach1
Part Meronym Has-Part From wholes to parts table2 → leg3
Part Holonym Part-Of From parts to wholes course7 → meal1
Antonym Semantic opposition between lemmas leader1 ⇐⇒ follower1
Derivation Lemmas w/same morphological root destruction1 ⇐⇒ destroy1
Figure I.3 Some of the noun relations in WordNet.

Relation Definition Example
Hypernym From events to superordinate events fly9 → travel5
Troponym From events to subordinate event walk1 → stroll1
Entails From verbs (events) to the verbs (events) they entail snore1 → sleep1
Antonym Semantic opposition between lemmas increase1 ⇐⇒ decrease1
Figure I.4 Some verb relations in WordNet.

 For example WordNet represents hyponymy (page 4) by relating each synset to
 its immediately more general and more specific synsets through direct hypernym
 and hyponym relations. These relations can be followed to produce longer chains of
 more general or more specific synsets. Figure I.5 shows hypernym chains for bass3
 and bass7 ; more general synsets are shown on successively indented lines.
 WordNet has two kinds of taxonomic entities: classes and instances. An instance
 is an individual, a proper noun that is a unique entity. San Francisco is an instance
 of city, for example. But city is a class, a hyponym of municipality and eventually of
 location. Fig. I.6 shows a subgraph of WordNet demonstrating many of the relations.
8 A PPENDIX I • W ORD S ENSES AND W ORD N ET

 bass3 , basso (an adult male singer with the lowest voice)
 => singer, vocalist, vocalizer, vocaliser
 => musician, instrumentalist, player
 => performer, performing artist
 => entertainer
 => person, individual, someone...
 => organism, being
 => living thing, animate thing,
 => whole, unit
 => object, physical object
 => physical entity
 => entity
 bass (member with the lowest range of a family of instruments)
 => musical instrument, instrument
 => device
 => instrumentality, instrumentation
 => artifact, artefact
 => whole, unit
 => object, physical object
 => physical entity
 => entity
 Figure I.5 Hyponymy chains for two separate senses of the lemma bass. Note that the
 chains are completely distinct, only converging at the very abstract level whole, unit.

 Figure I.6 WordNet viewed as a graph. Figure from Navigli (2016).

I.4 Word Sense Disambiguation
 The task of selecting the correct sense for a word is called word sense disambiguaword sense
disambiguation tion, or WSD. WSD algorithms take as input a word in context and a fixed inventory
 WSD of potential word senses and outputs the correct word sense in context.
 I.4 • W ORD S ENSE D ISAMBIGUATION 9

 I.4.1 WSD: The Task and Datasets
 In this section we introduce the task setup for WSD, and then turn to algorithms.
 The inventory of sense tags depends on the task. For sense tagging in the context
 of translation from English to Spanish, the sense tag inventory for an English word
 might be the set of different Spanish translations. For automatic indexing of medical articles, the sense-tag inventory might be the set of MeSH (Medical Subject
 Headings) thesaurus entries. Or we can use the set of senses from a resource like
 WordNet, or supersenses if we want a coarser-grain set. Figure I.4.1 shows some
 such examples for the word bass.

 WordNet Spanish WordNet
 Sense Translation Supersense Target Word in Context
 bass4 lubina FOOD . . . fish as Pacific salmon and striped bass and. . .
 bass7 bajo ARTIFACT . . . play bass because he doesn’t have to solo. . .
 Figure I.7 Some possible sense tag inventories for bass.

 In some situations, we just need to disambiguate a small number of words. In
lexical sample such lexical sample tasks, we have a small pre-selected set of target words and an
 inventory of senses for each word from some lexicon. Since the set of words and the
 set of senses are small, simple supervised classification approaches work very well.
 More commonly, however, we have a harder problem in which we have to disall-words ambiguate all the words in some text. In this all-words task, the system is given an
 entire texts and a lexicon with an inventory of senses for each entry and we have to
 disambiguate every word in the text (or sometimes just every content word). The
 all-words task is similar to part-of-speech tagging, except with a much larger set of
 tags since each lemma has its own set. A consequence of this larger set of tags is
 data sparseness.
 Supervised all-word disambiguation tasks are generally trained from a semantic
 semantic concordance, a corpus in which each open-class word in each sentence is labeled
 concordance
 with its word sense from a specific dictionary or thesaurus, most often WordNet.
 The SemCor corpus is a subset of the Brown Corpus consisting of over 226,036
 words that were manually tagged with WordNet senses (Miller et al. 1993, Landes
 et al. 1998). Other sense-tagged corpora have been built for the SENSEVAL and SemEval WSD tasks, such as the SENSEVAL-3 Task 1 English all-words test data with
 2282 annotations (Snyder and Palmer, 2004) or the SemEval-13 Task 12 datasets.
 Large semantic concordances are also available in other languages including Dutch
 (Vossen et al., 2011) and German (Henrich et al., 2012).
 Here’s an example from the SemCor corpus showing the WordNet sense numbers of the tagged words; we’ve used the standard WSD notation in which a subscript
 marks the part of speech (Navigli, 2009):
 (I.12) You will find9v that avocado1n is1v unlike1j other1j fruit1n you have ever1r tasted2v
 Given each noun, verb, adjective, or adverb word in the hand-labeled test set (say
 fruit), the SemCor-based WSD task is to choose the correct sense from the possible
 senses in WordNet. For fruit this would mean choosing between the correct answer
 fruit1n (the ripened reproductive body of a seed plant), and the other two senses fruit2n
 (yield; an amount of a product) and fruit3n (the consequence of some effort or action).
 Fig. I.8 sketches the task.
 WSD systems are typically evaluated intrinsically, by computing F1 against
 hand-labeled sense tags in a held-out set, such as the SemCor corpus or SemEval
 corpora discussed above.
10 A PPENDIX I • W ORD S ENSES AND W ORD N ET

 y5 y6
 y3
 stand1: side1:
 y1 bass1: y4 upright relative
 low range … region
 electric1: … player1: stand5: …
 using bass4: in game bear side3:
 electricity sea fish player2: … of body
 electric2: … musician stand10: …
 tense
 y2 bass7: player3: put side11:
 electric3: instrument actor upright slope
 thrilling guitar1 … … … …

 x1 x2 x3 x4 x5 x6
 an electric guitar and bass player stand oﬀ to one side

 Figure I.8 The all-words WSD task, mapping from input words (x) to WordNet senses
 (y). Only nouns, verbs, adjectives, and adverbs are mapped, and note that some words (like
 guitar in the example) only have one sense in WordNet. Figure inspired by Chaplot and
 Salakhutdinov (2018).

 most frequent A surprisingly strong baseline is simply to choose the most frequent sense for
 sense
 each word from the senses in a labeled corpus (Gale et al., 1992a). For WordNet, this
 corresponds to the first sense, since senses in WordNet are generally ordered from
 most frequent to least frequent based on their counts in the SemCor sense-tagged
 corpus. The most frequent sense baseline can be quite accurate, and is therefore
 often used as a default, to supply a word sense when a supervised algorithm has
 insufficient training data.
 one sense per
 discourse A second heuristic, called one sense per discourse is based on the work of
 Gale et al. (1992b), who noticed that a word appearing multiple times in a text or
 discourse often appears with the same sense. This heuristic seems to hold better for
 coarse-grained senses and particularly when a word’s senses are unrelated, so isn’t
 generally used as a baseline. Nonetheless various kinds of disambiguation tasks
 often include some such bias toward resolving an ambiguity the same way inside a
 discourse segment.

 I.4.2 The WSD Algorithm: Contextual Embeddings
 The best performing WSD algorithm is a simple 1-nearest-neighbor algorithm using
 contextual word embeddings, due to Melamud et al. (2016) and Peters et al. (2018).
 At training time we pass each sentence in the SemCore labeled dataset through any
 contextual embedding (e.g., BERT) resulting in a contextual embedding for each
 labeled token in SemCore. (There are various ways to compute this contextual embedding vi for a token i; for BERT it is common to pool multiple layers by summing
 the vector representations of i from the last four BERT layers). Then for each sense
 s of any word in the corpus, for each of the n tokens of that sense, we average their
 n contextual representations vi to produce a contextual sense embedding vs for s:

 1X
 vs = vi ∀vi ∈ tokens(s) (I.13)
 n
 i

 At test time, given a token of a target word t in context, we compute its contextual
 embedding t and choose its nearest neighbor sense from the training set, i.e., the
 I.4 • W ORD S ENSE D ISAMBIGUATION 11

sense whose sense embedding has the highest cosine with t:

 sense(t) = argmax cosine(t, vs ) (I.14)
 s∈senses(t)

Fig. I.9 illustrates the model.

 find5
 find4
 v
 v
 find1
 v
 find9
 v

 cI cfound cthe cjar cempty

 ENCODER
 I found the jar empty
Figure I.9 The nearest-neighbor algorithm for WSD. In green are the contextual embeddings precomputed for each sense of each word; here we just show a few of the senses for
find. A contextual embedding is computed for the target word found, and then the nearest
neighbor sense (in this case find9v ) is chosen. Figure inspired by Loureiro and Jorge (2019).

 What do we do for words we haven’t seen in the sense-labeled training data?
After all, the number of senses that appear in SemCor is only a small fraction of the
words in WordNet. The simplest algorithm is to fall back to the Most Frequent Sense
baseline, i.e. taking the first sense in WordNet. But that’s not very satisfactory.
 A more powerful approach, due to Loureiro and Jorge (2019), is to impute the
missing sense embeddings, bottom-up, by using the WordNet taxonomy and supersenses. We get a sense embedding for any higher-level node in the WordNet taxonomy by averaging the embeddings of its children, thus computing the embedding for
each synset as the average of its sense embeddings, the embedding for a hypernym
as the average of its synset embeddings, and the lexicographic category (supersense)
embedding as the average of the large set of synset embeddings with that category.
More formally, for each missing sense in WordNet ŝ ∈ W , let the sense embeddings
for the other members of its synset be Sŝ , the hypernym-specific synset embeddings
be Hŝ , and the lexicographic (supersense-specific) synset embeddings be Lŝ . We can
then compute the sense embedding for ŝ as follows:

 1 X
 if |Sŝ | > 0, vŝ = vs , ∀vs ∈ Sŝ (I.15)
 |Sŝ |
 1 X
 else if |Hŝ | > 0, vŝ = vsyn , ∀vsyn ∈ Hŝ (I.16)
 |Hŝ |
 1 X
 else if |Lŝ | > 0, vŝ = vsyn , ∀vsyn ∈ Lŝ (I.17)
 |Lŝ |

Since all of the supersenses have some labeled data in SemCor, the algorithm is
guaranteed to have some representation for all possible senses by the time the algorithm backs off to the most general (supersense) information, although of course
with a very coarse model.
12 A PPENDIX I • W ORD S ENSES AND W ORD N ET

I.5 Alternate WSD algorithms and Tasks

 I.5.1 Feature-Based WSD
 Feature-based algorithms for WSD are extremely simple and function almost as
 well as contextual language model algorithms. The best performing IMS algorithm
 (Zhong and Ng, 2010), augmented by embeddings (Iacobacci et al. 2016, Raganato
 et al. 2017b), uses an SVM classifier to choose the sense for each input word with
 the following simple features of the surrounding words:
 • part-of-speech tags (for a window of 3 words on each side, stopping at sentence boundaries)
 collocation • collocation features of words or n-grams of lengths 1, 2, 3 at a particular
 location in a window of 3 words on each side (i.e., exactly one word to the
 right, or the two words starting 3 words to the left, and so on).
 • weighted average of embeddings (of all words in a window of 10 words on
 each side, weighted exponentially by distance)
 Consider the ambiguous word bass in the following WSJ sentence:
 (I.18) An electric guitar and bass player stand off to one side,
 If we used a small 2-word window, a standard feature vector might include parts-ofspeech, unigram and bigram collocation features, and a weighted sum g of embeddings, that is:

 [wi−2 , POSi−2 , wi−1 , POSi−1 , wi+1 , POSi+1 , wi+2 , POSi+2 , wi−1
 i−2 ,
 wi+2
 i+1 , g(E(wi−2 ), E(wi−1 ), E(wi+1 ), E(wi+2 )] (I.19)

 would yield the following vector:
 [guitar, NN, and, CC, player, NN, stand, VB, guitar and,
 player stand, g(E(guitar),E(and),E(player),E(stand))]

 I.5.2 The Lesk Algorithm as WSD Baseline
 Generating sense labeled corpora like SemCor is quite difficult and expensive. An
 knowledge- alternative class of WSD algorithms, knowledge-based algorithms, rely solely on
 based
 WordNet or other such resources and don’t require labeled data. While supervised
 algorithms generally work better, knowledge-based methods can be used in languages or domains where thesauruses or dictionaries but not sense labeled corpora
 are available.
Lesk algorithm The Lesk algorithm is the oldest and most powerful knowledge-based WSD
 method, and is a useful baseline. Lesk is really a family of algorithms that choose
 the sense whose dictionary gloss or definition shares the most words with the target
 word’s neighborhood. Figure I.10 shows the simplest version of the algorithm, often
Simplified Lesk called the Simplified Lesk algorithm (Kilgarriff and Rosenzweig, 2000).
 As an example of the Lesk algorithm at work, consider disambiguating the word
 bank in the following context:
 (I.20) The bank can guarantee deposits will eventually cover future tuition costs
 because it invests in adjustable-rate mortgage securities.
 given the following two WordNet senses:
 I.5 • A LTERNATE WSD ALGORITHMS AND TASKS 13

 function S IMPLIFIED L ESK(word, sentence) returns best sense of word

 best-sense ← most frequent sense for word
 max-overlap ← 0
 context ← set of words in sentence
 for each sense in senses of word do
 signature ← set of words in the gloss and examples of sense
 overlap ← C OMPUTE OVERLAP(signature, context)
 if overlap > max-overlap then
 max-overlap ← overlap
 best-sense ← sense
 end
 return(best-sense)

 Figure I.10 The Simplified Lesk algorithm. The C OMPUTE OVERLAP function returns the
 number of words in common between two sets, ignoring function words or other words on a
 stop list. The original Lesk algorithm defines the context in a more complex way.

 bank1 Gloss: a financial institution that accepts deposits and channels the
 money into lending activities
 Examples: “he cashed a check at the bank”, “that bank holds the mortgage
 on my home”
 bank2 Gloss: sloping land (especially the slope beside a body of water)
 Examples: “they pulled the canoe up on the bank”, “he sat on the bank of
 the river and watched the currents”

 Sense bank1 has two non-stopwords overlapping with the context in (I.20): deposits and mortgage, while sense bank2 has zero words, so sense bank1 is chosen.
 There are many obvious extensions to Simplified Lesk, such as weighing the
 overlapping words by IDF (inverse document frequency) (Chapter 5) to downweight
 frequent words like function words; best performing is to use word embedding cosine instead of word overlap to compute the similarity between the definition and the
 context (Basile et al., 2014). Modern neural extensions of Lesk use the definitions
 to compute sense embeddings that can be directly used instead of SemCor-training
 embeddings (Kumar et al. 2019, Luo et al. 2018a, Luo et al. 2018b).

 I.5.3 Word-in-Context Evaluation
 Word Sense Disambiguation is a much more fine-grained evaluation of word meaning than the context-free word similarity tasks we described in Chapter 5. Recall that
 tasks like LexSim-999 require systems to match human judgments on the contextfree similarity between two words (how similar is cup to mug?). We can think of
 WSD as a kind of contextualized similarity task, since our goal is to be able to distinguish the meaning of a word like bass in one context (playing music) from another
 context (fishing).
word-in-context Somewhere in between lies the word-in-context task. Here the system is given
 two sentences, each with the same target word but in a different sentential context.
 The system must decide whether the target words are used in the same sense in the
 WiC two sentences or in a different sense. Fig. I.11 shows sample pairs from the WiC
 dataset of Pilehvar and Camacho-Collados (2019).
 The WiC sentences are mainly taken from the example usages for senses in
 WordNet. But WordNet senses are very fine-grained. For this reason tasks like
14 A PPENDIX I • W ORD S ENSES AND W ORD N ET

 F There’s a lot of trash on the bed of the river —
 I keep a glass of water next to my bed when I sleep
 F Justify the margins — The end justifies the means
 T Air pollution — Open a window and let in some air
 T The expanded window will give us time to catch the thieves —
 You have a two-hour window of clear weather to finish working on the lawn
 Figure I.11 Positive (T) and negative (F) pairs from the WiC dataset (Pilehvar and
 Camacho-Collados, 2019).

 word-in-context first cluster the word senses into coarser clusters, so that the two
 sentential contexts for the target word are marked as T if the two senses are in the
 same cluster. WiC clusters all pairs of senses if they are first degree connections in
 the WordNet semantic graph, including sister senses, or if they belong to the same
 supersense; we point to other sense clustering algorithms at the end of the chapter.
 The baseline algorithm to solve the WiC task uses contextual embeddings like
 BERT with a simple thresholded cosine. We first compute the contextual embeddings for the target word in each of the two sentences, and then compute the cosine
 between them. If it’s above a threshold tuned on a devset we respond true (the two
 senses are the same) else we respond false.

 I.5.4 Wikipedia as a source of training data
 Datasets other than SemCor have been used for all-words WSD. One important direction is to use Wikipedia as a source of sense-labeled data. When a concept is
 mentioned in a Wikipedia article, the article text may contain an explicit link to the
 concept’s Wikipedia page, which is named by a unique identifier. This link can be
 used as a sense annotation. For example, the ambiguous word bar is linked to a
 different Wikipedia article depending on its meaning in context, including the page
 BAR (L AW ), the page BAR (M USIC ), and so on, as in the following Wikipedia
 examples (Mihalcea, 2007).

 In 1834, Sumner was admitted to the [[bar (law)|bar]] at the age of
 twenty-three, and entered private practice in Boston.
 It is danced in 3/4 time (like most waltzes), with the couple turning
 approx. 180 degrees every [[bar (music)|bar]].
 Jenga is a popular beer in the [[bar (establishment)|bar]]s of Thailand.

 These sentences can then be added to the training data for a supervised system.
 In order to use Wikipedia in this way, however, it is necessary to map from Wikipedia concepts to whatever inventory of senses is relevant for the WSD application.
 Automatic algorithms that map from Wikipedia to WordNet, for example, involve
 finding the WordNet sense that has the greatest lexical overlap with the Wikipedia
 sense, by comparing the vector of words in the WordNet synset, gloss, and related
 senses with the vector of words in the Wikipedia page title, outgoing links, and page
 category (Ponzetto and Navigli, 2010). The resulting mapping has been used to
 create BabelNet, a large sense-annotated resource (Navigli and Ponzetto, 2012).
 I.6 • U SING T HESAURUSES TO I MPROVE E MBEDDINGS 15

I.6 Using Thesauruses to Improve Embeddings
 Thesauruses have also been used to improve both static and contextual word embeddings. For example, static word embeddings have a problem with antonyms.
 A word like expensive is often very similar in embedding cosine to its antonym
 like cheap. Antonymy information from thesauruses can help solve this problem;
 Fig. I.12 shows nearest neighbors to some target words in GloVe, and the improvement after one such method.

 Before counterfitting After counterfitting
 east west north south eastward eastern easterly
 expensive pricey cheaper costly costly pricy overpriced
 British American Australian Britain Brits London BBC
 Figure I.12 The nearest neighbors in GloVe to east, expensive, and British include
 antonyms like west. The right side showing the improvement in GloVe nearest neighbors
 after the counterfitting method (Mrkšić et al., 2016).

 There are two families of solutions. The first requires retraining: we modify the
 embedding training to incorporate thesaurus relations like synonymy, antonym, or
 supersenses. This can be done by modifying the static embedding loss function for
 word2vec (Yu and Dredze 2014, Nguyen et al. 2016) or by modifying contextual
 embedding training (Levine et al. 2020, Lauscher et al. 2019).
 The second, for static embeddings, is more light-weight; after the embeddings
 have been trained we learn a second mapping based on a thesaurus that shifts the
 embeddings of words in such a way that synonyms (according to the thesaurus) are
 retrofitting pushed closer and antonyms further apart. Such methods are called retrofitting
 (Faruqui et al. 2015, Lengerich et al. 2018) or counterfitting (Mrkšić et al., 2016).

I.7 Word Sense Induction
 It is expensive and difficult to build large corpora in which each word is labeled for
 its word sense. For this reason, an unsupervised approach to sense disambiguation,
 word sense often called word sense induction or WSI, is an important direction. In unsuinduction
 pervised approaches, we don’t use human-defined word senses. Instead, the set of
 “senses” of each word is created automatically from the instances of each word in
 the training set.
 Most algorithms for word sense induction follow the early work of Schütze
 (Schütze 1992, Schütze 1998) in using some sort of clustering over word embeddings. In training, we use three steps:
 1. For each token wi of word w in a corpus, compute a context vector c.
 2. Use a clustering algorithm to cluster these word-token context vectors c into
 a predefined number of groups or clusters. Each cluster defines a sense of w.
 3. Compute the vector centroid of each cluster. Each vector centroid sj is a
 sense vector representing that sense of w.
 Since this is an unsupervised algorithm, we don’t have names for each of these
 “senses” of w; we just refer to the jth sense of w.
 To disambiguate a particular token t of w we again have three steps:
16 A PPENDIX I • W ORD S ENSES AND W ORD N ET

 1. Compute a context vector c for t.
 2. Retrieve all sense vectors s j for w.
 3. Assign t to the sense represented by the sense vector s j that is closest to t.
 All we need is a clustering algorithm and a distance metric between vectors.
 Clustering is a well-studied problem with a wide number of standard algorithms that
 can be applied to inputs structured as vectors of numerical values (Duda and Hart,
 1973). A frequently used technique in language applications is known as agglomagglomerative
 clustering erative clustering. In this technique, each of the N training instances is initially
 assigned to its own cluster. New clusters are then formed in a bottom-up fashion by
 the successive merging of the two clusters that are most similar. This process continues until either a specified number of clusters is reached, or some global goodness
 measure among the clusters is achieved. In cases in which the number of training
 instances makes this method too expensive, random sampling can be used on the
 original training set to achieve similar results.
 How can we evaluate unsupervised sense disambiguation approaches? As usual,
 the best way is to do extrinsic evaluation embedded in some end-to-end system; one
 example used in a SemEval bakeoff is to improve search result clustering and diversification (Navigli and Vannella, 2013). Intrinsic evaluation requires a way to
 map the automatically derived sense classes into a hand-labeled gold-standard set so
 that we can compare a hand-labeled test set with a set labeled by our unsupervised
 classifier. Various such metrics have been tested, for example in the SemEval tasks
 (Manandhar et al. 2010, Navigli and Vannella 2013, Jurgens and Klapaftis 2013),
 including cluster overlap metrics, or methods that map each sense cluster to a predefined sense by choosing the sense that (in some training set) has the most overlap
 with the cluster. However it is fair to say that no evaluation metric for this task has
 yet become standard.

I.8 Summary
 This chapter has covered a wide range of issues concerning the meanings associated
 with lexical items. The following are among the highlights:
 • A word sense is the locus of word meaning; definitions and meaning relations
 are defined at the level of the word sense rather than wordforms.
 • Many words are polysemous, having many senses.
 • Relations between senses include synonymy, antonymy, meronymy, and
 taxonomic relations hyponymy and hypernymy.
 • WordNet is a large database of lexical relations for English, and WordNets
 exist for a variety of languages.
 • Word-sense disambiguation (WSD) is the task of determining the correct
 sense of a word in context. Supervised approaches make use of a corpus
 of sentences in which individual words (lexical sample task) or all words
 (all-words task) are hand-labeled with senses from a resource like WordNet.
 SemCor is the largest corpus with WordNet-labeled senses.
 • The standard supervised algorithm for WSD is nearest neighbors with contextual embeddings.
 • Feature-based algorithms using parts of speech and embeddings of words in
 the context of the target word also work well.
 H ISTORICAL N OTES 17

 • An important baseline for WSD is the most frequent sense, equivalent, in
 WordNet, to take the first sense.
 • Another baseline is a knowledge-based WSD algorithm called the Lesk algorithm which chooses the sense whose dictionary definition shares the most
 words with the target word’s neighborhood.
 • Word sense induction is the task of learning word senses unsupervised.

Historical Notes
 Word sense disambiguation traces its roots to some of the earliest applications of
 digital computers. The insight that underlies modern algorithms for word sense disambiguation was first articulated by Weaver (1949/1955) in the context of machine
 translation:
 If one examines the words in a book, one at a time as through an opaque
 mask with a hole in it one word wide, then it is obviously impossible
 to determine, one at a time, the meaning of the words. [. . . ] But if
 one lengthens the slit in the opaque mask, until one can see not only
 the central word in question but also say N words on either side, then
 if N is large enough one can unambiguously decide the meaning of the
 central word. [. . . ] The practical question is : “What minimum value of
 N will, at least in a tolerable fraction of cases, lead to the correct choice
 of meaning for the central word?”
 Other notions first proposed in this early period include the use of a thesaurus for disambiguation (Masterman, 1957), supervised training of Bayesian models for disambiguation (Madhu and Lytel, 1965), and the use of clustering in word sense analysis
 (Sparck Jones, 1986).
 Much disambiguation work was conducted within the context of early AI-oriented
 natural language processing systems. Quillian (1968) and Quillian (1969) proposed
 a graph-based approach to language processing, in which the definition of a word
 was represented by a network of word nodes connected by syntactic and semantic
 relations, and sense disambiguation by finding the shortest path between senses in
 the graph. Simmons (1973) is another influential early semantic network approach.
 Wilks proposed one of the earliest non-discrete models with his Preference Semantics (Wilks 1975c, Wilks 1975b, Wilks 1975a), and Small and Rieger (1982) and
 Riesbeck (1975) proposed understanding systems based on modeling rich procedural information for each word. Hirst’s ABSITY system (Hirst and Charniak 1982,
 Hirst 1987, Hirst 1988), which used a technique called marker passing based on semantic networks, represents the most advanced system of this type. As with these
 largely symbolic approaches, early neural network (at the time called ‘connectionist’) approaches to word sense disambiguation relied on small lexicons with handcoded representations (Cottrell 1985, Kawamoto 1988).
 The earliest implementation of a robust empirical approach to sense disambiguation is due to Kelly and Stone (1975), who directed a team that hand-crafted a set
 of disambiguation rules for 1790 ambiguous English words. Lesk (1986) was the
 first to use a machine-readable dictionary for word sense disambiguation. Fellbaum
 (1998) collects early work on WordNet. Early work using dictionaries as lexical
18 A PPENDIX I • W ORD S ENSES AND W ORD N ET

 resources include Amsler’s 1981 use of the Merriam Webster dictionary and Longman’s Dictionary of Contemporary English (Boguraev and Briscoe, 1989).
 Supervised approaches to disambiguation began with the use of decision trees
 by Black (1988). In addition to the IMS and contextual-embedding based methods
 for supervised WSD, recent supervised algorithms includes encoder-decoder models
 (Raganato et al., 2017a).
 The need for large amounts of annotated text in supervised methods led early
 on to investigations into the use of bootstrapping methods (Hearst 1991, Yarowsky
 1995). For example the semi-supervised algorithm of Diab and Resnik (2002) is
 based on aligned parallel corpora in two languages. For example, the fact that the
 French word catastrophe might be translated as English disaster in one instance
 and tragedy in another instance can be used to disambiguate the senses of the two
 English words (i.e., to choose senses of disaster and tragedy that are similar).
 The earliest use of clustering in the study of word senses was by Sparck Jones
 (1986); Pedersen and Bruce (1997), Schütze (1997), and Schütze (1998) applied discoarse senses tributional methods. Clustering word senses into coarse senses has also been used
 to address the problem of dictionary senses being too fine-grained (Section I.5.3)
 (Dolan 1994, Chen and Chang 1998, Mihalcea and Moldovan 2001, Agirre and
 de Lacalle 2003, Palmer et al. 2004, Navigli 2006, Snow et al. 2007, Pilehvar et al.
 2013). Corpora with clustered word senses for training supervised clustering algo-
OntoNotes rithms include Palmer et al. (2006) and OntoNotes (Hovy et al., 2006).
 See Pustejovsky (1995), Pustejovsky and Boguraev (1996), Martin (1986), and
 Copestake and Briscoe (1995), inter alia, for computational approaches to the repgenerative resentation of polysemy. Pustejovsky’s theory of the generative lexicon, and in
 lexicon
 qualia particular his theory of the qualia structure of words, is a way of accounting for the
 structure
 dynamic systematic polysemy of words in context.
 Historical overviews of WSD include Agirre and Edmonds (2006) and Navigli
 (2009).

Exercises
 I.1 Collect a small corpus of example sentences of varying lengths from any
 newspaper or magazine. Using WordNet or any standard dictionary, determine how many senses there are for each of the open-class words in each sentence. How many distinct combinations of senses are there for each sentence?
 How does this number seem to vary with sentence length?
 I.2 Using WordNet or a standard reference dictionary, tag each open-class word
 in your corpus with its correct tag. Was choosing the correct sense always a
 straightforward task? Report on any difficulties you encountered.
 I.3 Using your favorite dictionary, simulate the original Lesk word overlap disambiguation algorithm described on page 13 on the phrase Time flies like an
 arrow. Assume that the words are to be disambiguated one at a time, from
 left to right, and that the results from earlier decisions are used later in the
 process.
 I.4 Build an implementation of your solution to the previous exercise. Using
 WordNet, implement the original Lesk word overlap disambiguation algorithm described on page 13 on the phrase Time flies like an arrow.
 Exercises 19

Agirre, E. and O. L. de Lacalle. 2003. Clustering WordNet Hirst, G. 1987. Semantic Interpretation and the Resolution
 word senses. RANLP 2003. of Ambiguity. Cambridge University Press.
Agirre, E. and P. Edmonds, eds. 2006. Word Sense Disam- Hirst, G. 1988. Resolving lexical ambiguity computationally
 biguation: Algorithms and Applications. Kluwer. with spreading activation and polaroid words. In S. L.
Amsler, R. A. 1981. A taxonomy for English nouns and Small, G. W. Cottrell, and M. K. Tanenhaus, eds, Lexical
 verbs. ACL. Ambiguity Resolution, 73–108. Morgan Kaufmann.
Basile, P., A. Caputo, and G. Semeraro. 2014. An enhanced Hirst, G. and E. Charniak. 1982. Word sense and case slot
 Lesk word sense disambiguation algorithm through a dis- disambiguation. AAAI.
 tributional semantic model. COLING. Hovy, E. H., M. P. Marcus, M. Palmer, L. A. Ramshaw,
 and R. Weischedel. 2006. OntoNotes: The 90% solution.
Black, E. 1988. An experiment in computational discrimi-
HLT-NAACL.
 nation of English word senses. IBM Journal of Research
 and Development, 32(2):185–194. Iacobacci, I., M. T. Pilehvar, and R. Navigli. 2016. Embeddings for word sense disambiguation: An evaluation
Boguraev, B. K. and T. Briscoe, eds. 1989. Computational
 study. ACL.
 Lexicography for Natural Language Processing. Longman. Jurgens, D. and I. P. Klapaftis. 2013. SemEval-2013 task 13:
 Word sense induction for graded and non-graded senses.
Chaplot, D. S. and R. Salakhutdinov. 2018. Knowledge- *SEM.
 based word sense disambiguation using topic models.
 AAAI. Kawamoto, A. H. 1988. Distributed representations of ambiguous words and their resolution in connectionist net-
Chen, J. N. and J. S. Chang. 1998. Topical clustering of works. In S. L. Small, G. W. Cottrell, and M. Tanen-
MRD senses based on information retrieval techniques. haus, eds, Lexical Ambiguity Resolution, 195–228. Mor-
Computational Linguistics, 24(1):61–96. gan Kaufman.
Ciaramita, M. and Y. Altun. 2006. Broad-coverage sense Kelly, E. F. and P. J. Stone. 1975. Computer Recognition of
 disambiguation and information extraction with a super- English Word Senses. North-Holland.
 sense sequence tagger. EMNLP.
 Kilgarriff, A. and J. Rosenzweig. 2000. Framework and re-
Ciaramita, M. and M. Johnson. 2003. Supersense tagging of sults for English SENSEVAL. Computers and the Huunknown nouns in WordNet. EMNLP-2003. manities, 34:15–48.
Copestake, A. and T. Briscoe. 1995. Semi-productive Kumar, S., S. Jat, K. Saxena, and P. Talukdar. 2019. Zeropolysemy and sense extension. Journal of Semantics, shot word sense disambiguation using sense definition
 12(1):15–68. embeddings. ACL.
Cottrell, G. W. 1985. A Connectionist Approach to Word Landes, S., C. Leacock, and R. I. Tengi. 1998. Building se-
Sense Disambiguation. Ph.D. thesis, University of mantic concordances. In C. Fellbaum, ed., WordNet: An
 Rochester, Rochester, NY. Revised version published by Electronic Lexical Database, 199–216. MIT Press.
 Pitman, 1989. Lauscher, A., I. Vulić, E. M. Ponti, A. Korhonen, and
Diab, M. and P. Resnik. 2002. An unsupervised method for G. Glavaš. 2019. Informing unsupervised pretraining
 word sense tagging using parallel corpora. ACL. with external linguistic knowledge. ArXiv preprint
Dolan, B. 1994. Word sense ambiguation: Clustering related arXiv:1909.02339.
 senses. COLING. Lengerich, B., A. Maas, and C. Potts. 2018. Retrofitting dis-
Duda, R. O. and P. E. Hart. 1973. Pattern Classification and tributional embeddings to knowledge graphs with func-
Scene Analysis. John Wiley and Sons. tional relations. COLING.
Faruqui, M., J. Dodge, S. K. Jauhar, C. Dyer, E. Hovy, and Lesk, M. E. 1986. Automatic sense disambiguation using
 N. A. Smith. 2015. Retrofitting word vectors to semantic machine readable dictionaries: How to tell a pine cone
 lexicons. NAACL HLT. from an ice cream cone. Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on Systems Documentation.
Fellbaum, C., ed. 1998. WordNet: An Electronic Lexical
 Database. MIT Press. Levine, Y., B. Lenz, O. Dagan, O. Ram, D. Padnos, O. Sharir, S. Shalev-Shwartz, A. Shashua, and
Gale, W. A., K. W. Church, and D. Yarowsky. 1992a. Es- Y. Shoham. 2020. SenseBERT: Driving some sense into
 timating upper and lower bounds on the performance of BERT. ACL.
 word-sense disambiguation programs. ACL.
 Loureiro, D. and A. Jorge. 2019. Language modelling makes
Gale, W. A., K. W. Church, and D. Yarowsky. 1992b. One sense: Propagating representations through WordNet for
 sense per discourse. HLT. full-coverage word sense disambiguation. ACL.
Haber, J. and M. Poesio. 2020. Assessing polyseme sense Luo, F., T. Liu, Z. He, Q. Xia, Z. Sui, and B. Chang. 2018a.
 similarity through co-predication acceptability and con- Leveraging gloss knowledge in neural word sense disamtextualised embedding distance. *SEM. biguation by hierarchical co-attention. EMNLP.
Hearst, M. A. 1991. Noun homograph disambiguation. Pro- Luo, F., T. Liu, Q. Xia, B. Chang, and Z. Sui. 2018b. Incorceedings of the 7th Conference of the University of Wa- porating glosses into neural word sense disambiguation.
 terloo Centre for the New OED and Text Research. ACL.
Henrich, V., E. Hinrichs, and T. Vodolazova. 2012. We- Madhu, S. and D. Lytel. 1965. A figure of merit technique for
 bCAGe – a web-harvested corpus annotated with Ger- the resolution of non-grammatical ambiguity. Mechanical
 maNet senses. EACL. Translation, 8(2):9–13.
20 Appendix I • Word Senses and WordNet

Manandhar, S., I. P. Klapaftis, D. Dligach, and S. Pradhan. Ponzetto, S. P. and R. Navigli. 2010. Knowledge-rich word
 2010. SemEval-2010 task 14: Word sense induction & sense disambiguation rivaling supervised systems. ACL.
 disambiguation. SemEval. Pu, X., N. Pappas, J. Henderson, and A. Popescu-Belis.
Martin, J. H. 1986. The acquisition of polysemy. ICML. 2018. Integrating weakly supervised word sense disam-
Masterman, M. 1957. The thesaurus in syntax and semantics. biguation into neural machine translation. TACL, 6:635–
 Mechanical Translation, 4(1):1–2. 649.
Melamud, O., J. Goldberger, and I. Dagan. 2016. con- Pustejovsky, J. 1995. The Generative Lexicon. MIT Press.
 text2vec: Learning generic context embedding with bidi- Pustejovsky, J. and B. K. Boguraev, eds. 1996. Lexical Serectional LSTM. CoNLL. mantics: The Problem of Polysemy. Oxford University
Mihalcea, R. 2007. Using Wikipedia for automatic word Press.
 sense disambiguation. NAACL-HLT. Quillian, M. R. 1968. Semantic memory. In M. Minsky, ed.,
Mihalcea, R. and D. Moldovan. 2001. Automatic genera- Semantic Information Processing, 227–270. MIT Press.
 tion of a coarse grained WordNet. NAACL Workshop on Quillian, M. R. 1969. The teachable language compre-
WordNet and Other Lexical Resources. hender: A simulation program and theory of language.
Miller, G. A., C. Leacock, R. I. Tengi, and R. T. Bunker. CACM, 12(8):459–476.
 1993. A semantic concordance. HLT. Raganato, A., C. D. Bovi, and R. Navigli. 2017a. Neural se-
Morris, W., ed. 1985. American Heritage Dictionary, 2nd quence learning models for word sense disambiguation.
 college edition edition. Houghton Mifflin. EMNLP.
Mrkšić, N., D. Ó. Séaghdha, B. Thomson, M. Gašić, L. M. Raganato, A., J. Camacho-Collados, and R. Navigli. 2017b.
 Rojas-Barahona, P.-H. Su, D. Vandyke, T.-H. Wen, and Word sense disambiguation: A unified evaluation frame-
S. Young. 2016. Counter-fitting word vectors to linguis- work and empirical comparison. EACL.
 tic constraints. NAACL HLT.
 Riesbeck, C. K. 1975. Conceptual analysis. In R. C. Schank,
Navigli, R. 2006. Meaningful clustering of senses helps ed., Conceptual Information Processing, 83–156. Ameriboost word sense disambiguation performance. COL- can Elsevier, New York.
 ING/ACL.
 Schneider, N., J. D. Hwang, V. Srikumar, J. Prange, A. Blod-
Navigli, R. 2009. Word sense disambiguation: A survey. gett, S. R. Moeller, A. Stern, A. Bitan, and O. Abend.
 ACM Computing Surveys, 41(2). 2018. Comprehensive supersense disambiguation of En-
Navigli, R. 2016. Chapter 20. ontologies. In R. Mitkov, ed., glish prepositions and possessives. ACL.
 The Oxford handbook of computational linguistics. Ox- Schütze, H. 1992. Dimensions of meaning. Proceedings of
 ford University Press. Supercomputing ’92. IEEE Press.
Navigli, R. and S. P. Ponzetto. 2012. BabelNet: The auto- Schütze, H. 1997. Ambiguity Resolution in Language Learnmatic construction, evaluation and application of a wide- ing: Computational and Cognitive Models. CSLI Publicoverage multilingual semantic network. Artificial Intel- cations, Stanford, CA.
 ligence, 193:217–250.
 Schütze, H. 1998. Automatic word sense discrimination.
Navigli, R. and D. Vannella. 2013. SemEval-2013 task 11:
 Computational Linguistics, 24(1):97–124.
 Word sense induction and disambiguation within an enduser application. *SEM. Simmons, R. F. 1973. Semantic networks: Their computation and use for understanding English sentences. In
Nguyen, K. A., S. Schulte im Walde, and N. T. Vu. 2016.
 R. C. Schank and K. M. Colby, eds, Computer Models of
 Integrating distributional lexical contrast into word em-
Thought and Language, 61–113. W.H. Freeman & Co.
 beddings for antonym-synonym distinction. ACL.
 Small, S. L. and C. Rieger. 1982. Parsing and comprehend-
Palmer, M., O. Babko-Malaya, and H. T. Dang. 2004. Difing with Word Experts. In W. G. Lehnert and M. H.
 ferent sense granularities for different applications. HLT-
Ringle, eds, Strategies for Natural Language Processing,
 NAACL Workshop on Scalable Natural Language Under-
89–147. Lawrence Erlbaum.
 standing.
Palmer, M., H. T. Dang, and C. Fellbaum. 2006. Making Snow, R., S. Prakash, D. Jurafsky, and A. Y. Ng. 2007.
 fine-grained and coarse-grained sense distinctions, both Learning to merge word senses. EMNLP/CoNLL.
 manually and automatically. Natural Language Engineer- Snyder, B. and M. Palmer. 2004. The English all-words task.
 ing, 13(2):137–163. SENSEVAL-3.
Pedersen, T. and R. Bruce. 1997. Distinguishing word senses Sparck Jones, K. 1986. Synonymy and Semantic Classificain untagged text. EMNLP. tion. Edinburgh University Press, Edinburgh. Republica-
Peters, M., M. Neumann, M. Iyyer, M. Gardner, C. Clark, tion of 1964 PhD Thesis.
 K. Lee, and L. Zettlemoyer. 2018. Deep contextualized Tsvetkov, Y., N. Schneider, D. Hovy, A. Bhatia, M. Faruqui,
 word representations. NAACL HLT. and C. Dyer. 2014. Augmenting English adjective senses
Pilehvar, M. T. and J. Camacho-Collados. 2019. WiC: the with supersenses. LREC.
 word-in-context dataset for evaluating context-sensitive Vossen, P., A. Görög, F. Laan, M. Van Gompel, R. Izquierdo,
 meaning representations. NAACL HLT. and A. Van Den Bosch. 2011. Dutch-semcor: building a
Pilehvar, M. T., D. Jurgens, and R. Navigli. 2013. Align, semantically annotated corpus for dutch. Proceedings of
 disambiguate and walk: A unified approach for measur- eLex.
 ing semantic similarity. ACL.
 Exercises 21

Weaver, W. 1949/1955. Translation. In W. N. Locke and
 A. D. Boothe, eds, Machine Translation of Languages,
 15–23. MIT Press. Reprinted from a memorandum written by Weaver in 1949.
Wilks, Y. 1975a. An intelligent analyzer and understander of
 English. CACM, 18(5):264–274.
Wilks, Y. 1975b. Preference semantics. In E. L. Keenan,
 ed., The Formal Semantics of Natural Language, 329–
 350. Cambridge Univ. Press.
Wilks, Y. 1975c. A preferential, pattern-seeking, semantics for natural language inference. Artificial Intelligence,
 6(1):53–74.
Yarowsky, D. 1995. Unsupervised word sense disambiguation rivaling supervised methods. ACL.
Yu, M. and M. Dredze. 2014. Improving lexical embeddings
 with semantic knowledge. ACL.
Zhong, Z. and H. T. Ng. 2010. It makes sense: A widecoverage word sense disambiguation system for free text.
 ACL.
