rights reserved. Draft of August 24, 2025.

CHAPTER

 Logistic Regression and Text
4 Classification
 En sus remotas páginas está escrito que los animales se dividen en:
 a. pertenecientes al Emperador h. incluidos en esta clasificación
 b. embalsamados i. que se agitan como locos
 c. amaestrados j. innumerables
 d. lechones k. dibujados con un pincel finı́simo de pelo de camello
 e. sirenas l. etcétera
 f. fabulosos m. que acaban de romper el jarrón
 g. perros sueltos n. que de lejos parecen moscas
 Borges (1964)

 Classification lies at the heart of language processing and intelligence. Recognizing a letter, a word, or a face, sorting mail, assigning grades to homeworks; these
 are all examples of assigning a category to an input. The challenges of classification
 were famously highlighted by the fabulist Jorge Luis Borges (1964), who imagined
 an ancient mythical encyclopedia that classified animals into:
 (a) those that belong to the Emperor, (b) embalmed ones, (c) those that
 are trained, (d) suckling pigs, (e) mermaids, (f) fabulous ones, (g) stray
 dogs, (h) those that are included in this classification, (i) those that
 tremble as if they were mad, (j) innumerable ones, (k) those drawn with
 a very fine camel’s hair brush, (l) others, (m) those that have just broken
 a flower vase, (n) those that resemble flies from a distance.
 Luckily, the classes we use for language processing are easier to define than
 those of Borges. In this chapter we introduce the logistic regression algorithm for
 text
 categorization classification, and apply it to text categorization, the task of assigning a label or
 category to a text or document. We’ll focus on one text categorization task, sentisentiment
 analysis ment analysis, the categorization of sentiment, the positive or negative orientation
 that a writer expresses toward some object. A review of a movie, book, or product
 expresses the author’s sentiment toward the product, while an editorial or political
 text expresses sentiment toward an action or candidate. Extracting sentiment is thus
 relevant for fields from marketing to politics.
 For the binary task of labeling a text as indicating positive or negative stance,
 words (like awesome and love, or awful and ridiculously are very informative, as we
 can see from these sample extracts from movie/restaurant reviews:
 + ...awesome caramel sauce and sweet toasty almonds. I love this place!
 − ...awful pizza and ridiculously overpriced...
spam detection There are many text classification tasks. In spam detection we assign an email
 language id to one of the two classes spam or not-spam. Language id is the task of determinauthorship ing what language a text is written in, while authorship attribution is the task of
 attribution
 determining a text’s author, relevant to both humanistic and forensic analysis.
2 C HAPTER 4 • L OGISTIC R EGRESSION

 But what makes classification so important is that language modeling can also
 be viewed as classification: each word can be thought of as a class, and so predicting
 the next word is classifying the context-so-far into a class for each next word. As
 we’ll see, this intuition underlies large language models.
 The algorithm for classification we introduce in this chapter, logistic regression,
 is equally important, in a number of ways. First, logistic regression has a close
 relationship with neural networks. As we will see in Chapter 6, a neural network
 can be viewed as a series of logistic regression classifiers stacked on top of each
 other. Second, logistic regression introduces ideas that are fundamental to neural
 sigmoid networks and language models, like the sigmoid and softmax functions, the logit,
 softmax and the key gradient descent algorithm for learning. Finally, logistic regression is
 logit also one of the most important analytic tools in the social and natural sciences.

 The goal of classification is to take a single input (we call each input an observaobservation tion), extract some useful features or properties of the input, and thereby classify
 the observation into one of a set of discrete classes. We’ll call the input x, and say
 that the output comes from a fixed set of output classes Y = {y1 , y2 , ..., yM }. Our goal
 hat is return a predicted class ŷ ∈ Y . The hat or circumflex notation ŷ is used to refer to
 an estimated or predicted value. Sometimes you’ll see the output classes referred to
 as the set C instead of Y .
 For sentiment analysis, the input x might be a review, or some other text. And
 the output set Y might be the set:
 {positive, negative}
 or the set
 {0, 1}
 For language id, the input might be a text that we need to know what language it was
 written in, and the output set Y is the set of languages, i.e.,
 Y = {Abkhaz, Ainu, Albanian, Amharic, ...Zulu, Zuñi}
 There are many ways to do classification. One method is to use rules handwritten
 by humans. For example, we might have a rule like:
 If the word ‘‘love’’ appears in x, and it’s not preceded by the
 word ‘‘don’t", classify as positive
 Handwritten rules can be components of modern NLP systems, such as the handwritten lists of positive and negative words that can be used in sentiment analysis,
 as we’ll see below. But rules can be fragile, as situations or data change over time,
 and for many tasks there are complex interactions between different features (like
 the example of negation with “don’t” in the rule above), so it can be quite hard for
 humans to come up with rules that are successful over many situations.
 Another method that we will introduce later is to ask a large language model (of
 the type we will introduce in Chapter 7) by prompting the model to give a label to
 some text. Prompting can be powerful, but again has weaknesses: language models
 often hallucinate, and may not be able to explain why they chose the class they did.
 supervised
 For these reasons the most common way to do classification is to use supermachine vised machine learning. Supervised machine learning is a paradigm in which, in
 learning
 4.1 • M ACHINE LEARNING AND CLASSIFICATION 3

addition to the input and the set of output classes, we have a labeled training set
and a learning algorithm. We talked about training sets in Chapter 3 as a locus for
computing n-gram statistics. But in supervised machine learning the training set is
labeled, meaning that it contains a set of input observations, each observation associated with the correct output (a ‘supervision signal’). We can generally refer to a
training set of m input/output pairs, where each input x is a text, in the case of text
classification, and each is hand-labeled with an associated class (the correct label):.

 training set: {(x(1) , y(1) ), (x(2) , y(2) ), . . . , (x(m) , y(m) )} (4.1)

We’ll use superscripts in parentheses to refer to individual observations or instances
in the training set. So for sentiment classification, a training set might be a set of
sentences or other texts, each with their correct sentiment label.
 Our goal is to learn from this training set a classifier that is capable of mapping
from a new input x to its correct class y ∈ Y . It does this by learn to find features in
these training sentences (perhaps words like “awesome” or “awful”). Probabilistic
classifiers are the subset of machine learning classifiers that in addition to giving an
answer (which class is this observation in?), additionally will tell us the probability
of the observation being in the class. This full distribution over the classes can be
useful information for downstream decisions; avoiding making discrete decisions
early on can be useful when combining systems.
 There are many algorithms for achieving this supervised machine learning task,
(naive Bayes, support vector machines, neural networks, fine-tuned language models), but logistic regression has the advantages we discussed above and so we’ll
introduce it! Any machine learning classifier thus has four components:
 1. A feature representation of the input. For each input observation x(i) , this
 will be a vector of features [x1 , x2 , ..., xn ]. We will generally refer to feature
 ( j)
 i for input x( j) as xi , sometimes simplified as xi , but we will also see the
 notation fi , fi (x), or, for multiclass classification, fi (c, x).
 2. A classification function that computes ŷ, the estimated class, via P(y|x). We
 will introduce the sigmoid and softmax tools for classification.
 3. An objective function that we want to optimize for learning, usually involving minimizing a loss function corresponding to error on training examples.
 We will introduce the cross-entropy loss function.
 4. An algorithm for optimizing the objective function. We introduce the stochastic gradient descent algorithm.
 At the highest level, logistic regression, and really any supervised machine learning classifier, has two phases
 training: We train the system (in the case of logistic regression that means training the weights w and b, introduced below) using stochastic gradient descent
 and the cross-entropy loss.
 test: Given a test example x we compute the probability P(yi |x) of each class yi ,
 and return the higher probability label y = 1 or y = 0.
 Logistic regression can be used to classify an observation into one of two classes
(like ‘positive sentiment’ and ‘negative sentiment’), or into one of many classes.
Because the mathematics for the two-class case is simpler, we’ll first describe this
special case of logistic regression in the next few sections, beginning with the sigmoid function, and then turn to multinomial logistic regression for more than two
classes and the use of the softmax function in Section 4.4.
4 C HAPTER 4 • L OGISTIC R EGRESSION

 The goal of binary logistic regression is to train a classifier that can make a binary
 decision about the class of a new input observation. Here we introduce the sigmoid
 classifier that will help us make this decision.
 Consider a single input observation x, which we will represent by a vector of
 features [x1 , x2 , ..., xn ]. (We’ll show sample features in the next subsection.) The
 classifier output y can be 1 (meaning the observation is a member of the class) or
 0 (the observation is not a member of the class). We want to know the probability
 P(y = 1|x) that this observation is a member of the class. So perhaps the decision
 is “positive sentiment” versus “negative sentiment”, the features represent counts of
 words in a document, P(y = 1|x) is the probability that the document has positive
 sentiment, and P(y = 0|x) is the probability that the document has negative sentiment.
 Logistic regression solves this task by learning, from a training set, a vector of
 weights and a bias term. Each weight wi is a real number, and is associated with one
 of the input features xi . The weight wi represents how important that input feature
 is to the classification decision, and can be positive (providing evidence that the instance being classified belongs in the positive class) or negative (providing evidence
 that the instance being classified belongs in the negative class). Thus we might
 expect in a sentiment task the word awesome to have a high positive weight, and
 bias term abysmal to have a very negative weight. The bias term, also called the intercept, is
 intercept another real number that’s added to the weighted inputs.
 To make a decision on a test instance—after we’ve learned the weights in training—
 the classifier first multiplies each xi by its weight wi , sums up the weighted features,
 and adds the bias term b. The resulting single number z expresses the weighted sum
 of the evidence for the class.
 n
 !
 X
 z = wi xi + b (4.2)
 i=1

 dot product In the rest of the book we’ll represent such sums using the dot product notation
 from linear algebra. The dot product of two vectors a and b, written as a · b, is the
 sum of the products of the corresponding elements of each vector. (Notice that we
 represent vectors using the boldface notation b). Thus the following is an equivalent
 formation to Eq. 4.2:
 z = w·x+b (4.3)

 But note that nothing in Eq. 4.3 forces z to be a legal probability, that is, to lie
 between 0 and 1. In fact, since weights are real-valued, the output might even be
 negative; z ranges from −∞ to ∞.
 sigmoid To create a probability, we’ll pass z through the sigmoid function, σ (z). The
 sigmoid function (named because it looks like an s) is also called the logistic funclogistic tion, and gives logistic regression its name. The sigmoid has the following equation,
 function
 shown graphically in Fig. 4.1:
 1 1
 σ (z) = −z
 = (4.4)
 1+e 1 + exp (−z)
 (For the rest of the book, we’ll use the notation exp(x) to mean ex .) The sigmoid
 has a number of advantages; it takes a real-valued number and maps it into the range
 4.3 • C LASSIFICATION WITH L OGISTIC R EGRESSION 5

 (0, 1). It is nearly linear around 0 but outlier values get squashed toward 0 or 1.

 (0, 1), which is just what we want for a probability. Because it is nearly linear around
 0 but flattens toward the ends, it tends to squash outlier values toward 0 or 1. And
 it’s differentiable, which as we’ll see in Section 4.15 will be handy for learning.
 We’re almost there. If we apply the sigmoid to the sum of the weighted features,
 we get a number between 0 and 1. To make it a probability, we just need to make
 sure that the two cases, P(y = 1) and P(y = 0), sum to 1. We can do this as follows:
 P(y = 1) = σ (w · x + b)
 1 + exp (−(w · x + b))

 P(y = 0) = 1 − σ (w · x + b)
 = 1−
 1 + exp (−(w · x + b))
 exp (−(w · x + b))
 = (4.5)
 1 + exp (−(w · x + b))
 The sigmoid function has the property
 1 − σ (x) = σ (−x) (4.6)

 so we could also have expressed P(y = 0) as σ (−(w · x + b)).
 Finally, one terminological point. The input to the sigmoid function, the score
 logit z = w · x + b from Eq. 4.3, is often called the logit. This is because the logit function
 p
 is the inverse of the sigmoid. The logit function is the log of the odds ratio 1−p :
 p
 logit(p) = σ −1 (p) = ln (4.7)
 1− p
 Using the term logit for z is a way of reminding us that by using the sigmoid to turn
 z (which ranges from −∞ to ∞) into a probability, we are implicitly interpreting z as
 not just any real-valued number, but as specifically a log odds.

 The sigmoid function from the prior section thus gives us a way to take an instance
 x and compute the probability P(y = 1|x).
 How do we make a decision about which class to apply to a test instance x? For
 a given x, we say yes if the probability P(y = 1|x) is more than .5, and no otherwise.
 decision
 boundary We call .5 the decision boundary:
6 C HAPTER 4 • L OGISTIC R EGRESSION
 
 1 if P(y = 1|x) > 0.5
 decision(x) =
 0 otherwise

 Let’s have some examples of applying logistic regression as a classifier for language
 tasks.

 4.3.1 Sentiment Classification
 Suppose we are doing binary sentiment classification on movie review text, and
 we would like to know whether to assign the sentiment class + or − to a review
 document doc. We’ll represent each input observation by the 6 features x1 . . . x6 of
 the input shown in the following table; Fig. 4.2 shows features in a sample mini test
 document.

 Var Definition Value in Fig. 4.2
 x1 count(positive lexicon words ∈ doc) 3
 x2 count(negative
  lexicon words ∈ doc) 2
 1 if “no” ∈ doc
 x3 1
 0 otherwise
 x4 count(1st
  and 2nd pronouns ∈ doc) 3
 1 if “!” ∈ doc
 x5 0
 0 otherwise
 x6 ln(word+punctuation count of doc) ln(66) = 4.19

 x2=2
 x3=1
 It's hokey . There are virtually no surprises , and the writing is second-rate .
 So why was it so enjoyable ? For one thing , the cast is
 great . Another nice touch is the music . I was overcome with the urge to get off
 the couch and start dancing . It sucked me in , and it'll do the same to you .
 x4=3
 x1=3 x5=0 x6=4.19

 Let’s assume for the moment that we’ve already learned a real-valued weight
 for each of these features, and that the 6 weights corresponding to the 6 features
 are [2.5, −5.0, −1.2, 0.5, 2.0, 0.7], while b = 0.1. (We’ll discuss in the next section
 how the weights are learned.) The weight w1 , for example indicates how important
 a feature the number of positive lexicon words (great, nice, enjoyable, etc.) is to
 a positive sentiment decision, while w2 tells us the importance of negative lexicon
 words. Note that w1 = 2.5 is positive, while w2 = −5.0, meaning that negative words
 are negatively associated with a positive sentiment decision, and are about twice as
 important as positive words.
 Given these 6 features and the input review x, P(+|x) and P(−|x) can be com-
4.3 • C LASSIFICATION WITH L OGISTIC R EGRESSION 7

 puted using Eq. 4.5:
 P(+|x) = P(y = 1|x) = σ (w · x + b)
 = σ ([2.5, −5.0, −1.2, 0.5, 2.0, 0.7] · [3, 2, 1, 3, 0, 4.19] + 0.1)
 = σ (.833)
 = 0.70 (4.8)
 P(−|x) = P(y = 0|x) = 1 − σ (w · x + b)
 = 0.30

 4.3.2 Other classification tasks and features
 Logistic regression is applied to all sorts of NLP tasks, and any property of the input
 period
disambiguation can be a feature. Consider the task of period disambiguation: deciding if a period
 is the end of a sentence or part of a word, by classifying each period into one of two
 classes, EOS (end-of-sentence) and not-EOS. We might use features like x1 below
 expressing that the current word is lower case, perhaps with a positive weight. Or a
 feature expressing that the current word is in our abbreviations dictionary (“Prof.”),
 perhaps with a negative weight. A feature can also express a combination of properties. For example a period following an upper case word is likely to be an EOS, but
 if the word itself is St. and the previous word is capitalized then the period is likely
 part of a shortening of the word street following a street name.
 
 1 if “Case(wi ) = Lower”
 x1 =
 0 otherwise
 
 1 if “wi ∈ AcronymDict”
 x2 =
 0 otherwise
 
 1 if “wi = St. & Case(wi−1 ) = Upper”
 x3 =
 0 otherwise
 Designing versus learning features: In classic models, features are designed by
 hand by examining the training set with an eye to linguistic intuitions and literature,
 supplemented by insights from error analysis on the training set of an early version
 feature of a system. We can also consider feature interactions, complex features that are
 interactions
 combinations of more primitive features. We saw such a feature for period disambiguation above, where a period on the word St. was less likely to be the end of the
 sentence if the previous word was capitalized. Features can be created automatically
 feature
 templates via feature templates, abstract specifications of features. For example a bigram
 template for period disambiguation might create a feature for every pair of words
 that occurs before a period in the training set. Thus the feature space is sparse, since
 we only have to create a feature if that n-gram exists in that position in the training
 set. The feature is generally created as a hash from the string descriptions. A user
 description of a feature as, “bigram(American breakfast)” is hashed into a unique
 integer i that becomes the feature number fi .
 It should be clear from the prior paragraph that designing features by hand requires extensive human effort. For this reason, recent NLP systems avoid handdesigned features and instead focus on representation learning: ways to learn features automatically in an unsupervised way from the input. We’ll introduce methods
 for representation learning in Chapter 5 and Chapter 6.
 Scaling input features: When different input features have extremely different
 ranges of values, it’s common to rescale them so they have comparable ranges. We
8 C HAPTER 4 • L OGISTIC R EGRESSION

 standardize standardize input values by centering them to result in a zero mean and a standard
 z-score deviation of one (this transformation is sometimes called the z-score). That is, if µi
 is the mean of the values of feature xi across the m observations in the input dataset,
 and σi is the standard deviation of the values of features xi across the input dataset,
 we can replace each feature xi by a new feature xi0 computed as follows:
 v
 m
 u 1 m  ( j)
 u X 2
 1 X ( j)
 µi = xi σi = t xi − µi
 m m
 j=1 j=1
 xi − µi
 xi0 = (4.9)
 σi

 normalize Alternatively, we can normalize the input features values to lie between 0 and 1:

 xi − min(xi )
 xi0 = (4.10)
 max(xi ) − min(xi )

 Having input data with comparable range is useful when comparing values across
 features. Data scaling is especially important in large neural networks, since it helps
 speed up gradient descent.

 4.3.3 Processing many examples at once
 We’ve shown the equations for logistic regression for a single example. But in practice we’ll of course want to process an entire test set with many examples. Let’s
 suppose we have a test set consisting of m test examples each of which we’d like to
 classify. We’ll continue to use the notation from page 3, in which a superscript value
 in parentheses refers to the example index in some set of data (either for training or
 for test). So in this case each test example x(i) has a feature vector x(i) , 1 ≤ i ≤ m.
 (As usual, we’ll represent vectors and matrices in bold.)
 One way to compute each output value ŷ(i) is just to have a for-loop, and compute
 each test example one at a time:

 foreach x(i) in input [x(1) , x(2) , ..., x(m) ]
 y(i) = σ (w · x(i) + b) (4.11)

 For the first 3 test examples, then, we would be separately computing the predicted ŷ(i) as follows:

 P(y(1) = 1|x(1) ) = σ (w · x(1) + b)
 P(y(2) = 1|x(2) ) = σ (w · x(2) + b)
 P(y(3) = 1|x(3) ) = σ (w · x(3) + b)

 But it turns out that we can slightly modify our original equation Eq. 4.5 to do
 this much more efficiently. We’ll use matrix arithmetic to assign a class to all the
 examples with one matrix operation!
 First, we’ll pack all the input feature vectors for each input x into a single input
 matrix X, where each row i is a row vector consisting of the feature vector for input example x(i) (i.e., the vector x(i) ). Assuming each example has f features and
 4.4 • M ULTINOMIAL LOGISTIC REGRESSION 9

 weights, X will therefore be a matrix of shape [m × f ], as follows:
  (1) (1) (1)
 
 x1 x2 . . . x f
  (2) (2) (2) 
 x
 1 x2 . . . x f 
 X =    (4.12)
  x1(3) x2(3) . . . x(3)
 
 f
 
 ...

 Now if we introduce b as a vector of length m which consists of the scalar bias
 term b repeated m times, b = [b, b, ..., b], and ŷ = [ŷ(1) , ŷ(2) ..., ŷ(m) ] as the vector of
 outputs (one scalar ŷ(i) for each input x(i) and its feature vector x(i) ), and represent
 the weight vector w as a column vector, we can compute all the outputs with a single
 matrix multiplication and one addition:

 ŷ = σ (Xw + b) (4.13)

 You should convince yourself that Eq. 4.13 computes the same thing as our for-loop
 in Eq. 4.11. For example ŷ(1) , the first entry of the output vector y, will correctly be:
 (1) (1) (1)
 ŷ(1) = [x1 , x2 , ..., x f ] · [w1 , w2 , ..., w f ] + b (4.14)

 Note that we had to reorder X and w from the order they appeared in in Eq. 4.5 to
 make the multiplications come out properly. Here is Eq. 4.13 again with the shapes
 shown:

 ŷ = σ (X w + b)
 (m × 1) (m × f ) ( f × 1) (m × 1) (4.15)

 Modern compilers and compute hardware can compute this matrix operation very
 efficiently, making the computation much faster, which becomes important when
 training or testing on very large datasets.
 Note by the way that we could have kept X and w in the original order (as
 ŷ = σ (wX + b)) if we had chosen to define X differently as a matrix of column
 vectors, one vector for each input example, instead of row vectors, and then it would
 have shape [ f × m]. But we conventionally represent inputs as rows.

 Sometimes we need more than two classes. Perhaps we might want to do 3-way
 sentiment classification (positive, negative, or neutral). Or we could be assigning
 some of the labels we will introduce in Chapter 17, like the part of speech of a word
 (choosing from 10, 30, or even 50 different parts of speech), or the named entity
 type of a phrase (choosing from tags like person, location, organization). Or, for
 large language models, we’ll be predicting the next word out of the |V | possible
 multinomial
 words in the vocabulary, so it’s |V |-way classification.
 logistic In such cases we use multinomial logistic regression, also called softmax reregression
 gression (in older NLP literature you will sometimes see the name maxent classifier). In multinomial logistic regression we want to label each observation with a
 class k from a set of K classes, under the stipulation that only one of these classes is
 the correct one (sometimes called hard classification; an observation can not be in
10 C HAPTER 4 • L OGISTIC R EGRESSION

 multiple classes). Let’s use the following representation: the output y for each input
 x will be a vector of length K. If class c is the correct class, we’ll set yc = 1, and
 set all the other elements of y to be 0, i.e., yc = 1 and y j = 0 ∀ j 6= c. A vector like
 this y, with one value=1 and the rest 0, is called a one-hot vector. The job of the
 classifier is to produce an estimate vector ŷ. For each class k, the value ŷk will be
 the classifier’s estimate of the probability P(yk = 1|x).

 4.4.1 Softmax
 The multinomial logistic classifier uses a generalization of the sigmoid, called the
 softmax softmax function, to compute p(yk = 1|x). The softmax function takes a vector
 z = [z1 , z2 , ..., zK ] of K arbitrary values and maps them to a probability distribution,
 with each value in the range [0,1], and all the values summing to 1. Like the sigmoid,
 it is an exponential function.
 For a vector z of dimensionality K, the softmax is defined as:
 exp (zi )
 softmax(zi ) = PK 1≤i≤K (4.16)
 j=1 exp (z j )

 The softmax of an input vector z = [z1 , z2 , ..., zK ] is thus a vector itself:
 " #
 exp (z1 ) exp (z2 ) exp (zK )
 softmax(z) = PK , PK , ..., PK (4.17)
 i=1 exp (zi ) i=1 exp (zi ) i=1 exp (zi )

 The denominator Ki=1 exp (zi ) is used to normalize all the values into probabilities.
 P
 Thus for example given a vector:
 z = [0.6, 1.1, −1.5, 1.2, 3.2, −1.1]
 the resulting (rounded) softmax(z) is
 [0.05, 0.09, 0.01, 0.1, 0.74, 0.01]
 Like the sigmoid, the softmax has the property of squashing values toward 0 or 1.
 Thus if one of the inputs is larger than the others, it will tend to push its probability
 toward 1, and suppress the probabilities of the smaller inputs.
 Finally, note that, just as for the sigmoid, we refer to z, the vector of scores that
 is the input to the softmax, as logits (see Eq. 4.7).

 4.4.2 Applying softmax in logistic regression
 When we apply softmax for logistic regression, the input will (just as for the sigmoid) be the dot product between a weight vector w and an input vector x (plus a
 bias). But now we’ll need separate weight vectors wk and bias bk for each of the K
 classes. The probability of each of our output classes ŷk can thus be computed as:

 exp (wk · x + bk )
 P(yk = 1|x) = K
 (4.18)
 X
 exp (w j · x + b j )
 j=1

 The form of Eq. 4.18 makes it seem that we would compute each output separately. Instead, it’s more common to set up the equation for more efficient computation by modern vector processing hardware. We’ll do this by representing the
 4.4 • M ULTINOMIAL LOGISTIC REGRESSION 11

 set of K weight vectors as a weight matrix W and a bias vector b. Each row k of
 W corresponds to the vector of weights wk . W thus has shape [K × f ], for K the
 number of output classes and f the number of input features. The bias vector b has
 one value for each of the K output classes. If we represent the weights in this way,
 we can compute ŷ, the vector of output probabilities for each of the K classes, by a
 single elegant equation:
 ŷ = softmax(Wx + b) (4.19)

 If you work out the matrix arithmetic, you can see that the estimated score of
 the first output class ŷ1 (before we take the softmax) will correctly turn out to be
 w1 · x + b1 .
 One helpful interpretation of the weight matrix W is to see each row wk as a
prototype prototype of class k. The weight vector wk that is learned represents the class as
 a kind of template. Since two vectors that are more similar to each other have a
 higher dot product with each other, the dot product acts as a similarity function.
 Logistic regression is thus learning an exemplar representation for each class, such
 that incoming vectors are assigned the class k they are most similar to from the K
 classes (Doumbouya et al., 2025).
 Fig. 4.3 shows the difference between binary and multinomial logistic regression
 by illustrating the weight vector versus weight matrix in the computation of the
 output class probabilities.

 4.4.3 Features in Multinomial Logistic Regression
 Features in multinomial logistic regression act like features in binary logistic regression, with the difference mentioned above that we’ll need separate weight vectors
 and biases for each of the K classes. Recall our binary exclamation point feature x5
 from page 6:
 
 1 if “!” ∈ doc
 x5 =
 0 otherwise
 In binary classification a positive weight w5 on a feature influences the classifier
 toward y = 1 (positive sentiment) and a negative weight influences it toward y = 0
 (negative sentiment) with the absolute value indicating how important the feature
 is. For multinomial logistic regression, by contrast, with separate weights for each
 class, a feature can be evidence for or against each individual class.
 In 3-way multiclass sentiment classification, for example, we must assign each
 document one of the 3 classes +, −, or 0 (neutral). Now a feature related to exclamation marks might have a negative weight for 0 documents, and a positive weight
 for + or − documents:

 Feature Definition
  w5,+ w5,− w5,0
 1 if “!” ∈ doc
 f5 (x) 3.5 3.1 −5.3
 0 otherwise

 Because these feature weights are dependent both on the input text and the output
 class, we sometimes make this dependence explicit and represent the features themselves as f (x, y): a function of both the input and the class. Using such a notation
 f5 (x) above could be represented as three features f5 (x, +), f5 (x, −), and f5 (x, 0),
 each of which has a single weight. We’ll use this kind of notation in our description
 of the CRF in Chapter 17.
12 C HAPTER 4 • L OGISTIC R EGRESSION

 Binary Logistic Regression
 p(+) = 1- p(-)

 Output y y^
 sigmoid [scalar]

 Weight vector w
 [1⨉f]

 Input feature x x1 x2 x3 … xf
 vector [f ⨉1]
 wordcount positive lexicon count of
 =3 words = 1 “no” = 0

 Input words dessert was great

 Multinomial Logistic Regression
 p(+) p(-) p(neut)

 Output y y^1 ^y y^3 These f red weights
 softmax 2
 [K⨉1] are a row of W
 corresponding
 Weight W to weight vector w3,
 matrix [K⨉f] (= weights for class 3,
 = a prototype of class 3)
 Input feature x x1 x2 x3 … xf
 vector [f⨉1]
 wordcount positive lexicon count of
 =3 words = 1 “no” = 0

 Input words dessert was great

 single weight vector w, and has a scalar output ŷ. In multinomial logistic regression we have
 K separate weight vectors corresponding to the K classes, all packed into a single weight
 matrix W, and a vector output ŷ. We omit the biases from both figures for clarity.

 How are the parameters of the model, the weights w and bias b, learned? Logistic
 regression is an instance of supervised classification in which we know the correct
 label y (either 0 or 1) for each observation x. What the system produces via Eq. 4.5
 is ŷ, the system’s estimate of the true y. We want to learn parameters (meaning w
 and b) that make ŷ for each training observation as close as possible to the true y.
 This requires two components that we foreshadowed in the introduction to the
 chapter. The first is a metric for how close the current label (ŷ) is to the true gold
 label y. Rather than measure similarity, we usually talk about the opposite of this:
 the distance between the system output and the gold output, and we call this distance
 loss the loss function or the cost function. In the next section we’ll introduce the loss
 function that is commonly used for logistic regression and also for neural networks,
 4.6 • T HE CROSS - ENTROPY LOSS FUNCTION 13

 the cross-entropy loss.
 The second thing we need is an optimization algorithm for iteratively updating
 the weights so as to minimize this loss function. The standard algorithm for this is
 gradient descent; we’ll introduce the stochastic gradient descent algorithm in the
 following section.
 We’ll describe these algorithms for the simpler case of binary logistic regression in the next two sections, and then turn to multinomial logistic regression in
 Section 4.8.

 We need a loss function that expresses, for an observation x, how close the classifier
 output (ŷ = σ (w · x + b)) is to the correct output (y, which is 0 or 1). We’ll call this:

 L(ŷ, y) = How much ŷ differs from the true y (4.20)

 We do this via a loss function that prefers the correct class labels of the training examples to be more likely. This is called conditional maximum likelihood
 estimation: we choose the parameters w, b that maximize the log probability of
 the true y labels in the training data given the observations x. The resulting loss
 cross-entropy function is the negative log likelihood loss, generally called the cross-entropy loss.
 loss
 Let’s derive this loss function, applied to a single observation x. We’d like to
 learn weights that maximize the probability of the correct label p(y|x). Since there
 are only two discrete outcomes (1 or 0), this is a Bernoulli distribution, and we can
 express the probability p(y|x) that our classifier produces for one observation as the
 following (keeping in mind that if y = 1, Eq. 4.21 simplifies to ŷ; if y = 0, Eq. 4.21
 simplifies to 1 − ŷ):

 p(y|x) = ŷ y (1 − ŷ)1−y (4.21)

 Now we take the log of both sides. This will turn out to be handy mathematically,
 and doesn’t hurt us; whatever values maximize a probability will also maximize the
 log of the probability:

 log p(y|x) = log ŷ y (1 − ŷ)1−y
  

 = y log ŷ + (1 − y) log(1 − ŷ) (4.22)

 Eq. 4.22 describes a log likelihood that should be maximized. In order to turn this
 into a loss function (something that we need to minimize), we’ll just flip the sign on
 Eq. 4.22. The result is the cross-entropy loss LCE :

 LCE (ŷ, y) = − log p(y|x) = − [y log ŷ + (1 − y) log(1 − ŷ)] (4.23)

 Finally, we can plug in the definition of ŷ = σ (w · x + b):

 LCE (ŷ, y) = − [y log σ (w · x + b) + (1 − y) log (1 − σ (w · x + b))] (4.24)

 Let’s see if this loss function does the right thing for our example from Fig. 4.2. We
 want the loss to be smaller if the model’s estimate is close to correct, and bigger if
 the model is confused. So first let’s suppose the correct gold label for the sentiment
 example in Fig. 4.2 is positive, i.e., y = 1. In this case our model is doing well, since
14 C HAPTER 4 • L OGISTIC R EGRESSION

 from Eq. 4.8 it indeed gave the example a higher probability of being positive (.70)
 than negative (.30). If we plug σ (w · x + b) = .70 and y = 1 into Eq. 4.24, the right
 side of the equation drops out, leading to the following loss (we’ll use log to mean
 natural log when the base is not specified):
 LCE (ŷ, y) = −[y log σ (w · x + b) + (1 − y) log (1 − σ (w · x + b))]
 = − [log σ (w · x + b)]
 = − log(.70)
 = .36
 By contrast, let’s pretend instead that the example in Fig. 4.2 was actually negative,
 i.e., y = 0 (perhaps the reviewer went on to say “But bottom line, the movie is
 terrible! I beg you not to see it!”). In this case our model is confused and we’d want
 the loss to be higher. Now if we plug y = 0 and 1 − σ (w · x + b) = .30 from Eq. 4.8
 into Eq. 4.24, the left side of the equation drops out:
 LCE (ŷ, y) = −[y log σ (w · x + b)+(1 − y) log (1 − σ (w · x + b))]
 = − [log (1 − σ (w · x + b))]
 = − log (.30)
 = 1.2
 Sure enough, the loss for the first classifier (.36) is less than the loss for the second
 classifier (1.2).
 Why does minimizing this negative log probability do what we want? A perfect
 classifier would assign probability 1 to the correct outcome (y = 1 or y = 0) and
 probability 0 to the incorrect outcome. That means if y equals 1, the higher ŷ is (the
 closer it is to 1), the better the classifier; the lower ŷ is (the closer it is to 0), the
 worse the classifier. If y equals 0, instead, the higher 1 − ŷ is (closer to 1), the better
 the classifier. The negative log of ŷ (if the true y equals 1) or 1 − ŷ (if the true y
 equals 0) is a convenient loss metric since it goes from 0 (negative log of 1, no loss)
 to infinity (negative log of 0, infinite loss). This loss function also ensures that as
 the probability of the correct answer is maximized, the probability of the incorrect
 answer is minimized; since the two sum to one, any increase in the probability of the
 correct answer is coming at the expense of the incorrect answer. It’s called the crossentropy loss, because Eq. 4.22 is also the formula for the cross-entropy between the
 true probability distribution y and our estimated distribution ŷ.
 Now we know what we want to minimize; in the next section, we’ll see how to
 find the minimum.

 Our goal with gradient descent is to find the optimal weights: minimize the loss
 function we’ve defined for the model. In Eq. 4.25 below, we’ll explicitly represent
 the fact that the cross-entropy loss function LCE is parameterized by the weights. In
 machine learning in general we refer to the parameters being learned as θ ; in the
 case of logistic regression θ = {w, b}. So the goal is to find the set of weights which
 minimizes the loss function, averaged over all examples:
 m
 1X
 θ̂ = argmin LCE ( f (x(i) ; θ ), y(i) ) (4.25)
 θ m
 i=1
 4.7 • G RADIENT D ESCENT 15

 How shall we find the minimum of this (or any) loss function? Gradient descent is
 a method that finds a minimum of a function by figuring out in which direction (in
 the space of the parameters θ ) the function’s slope is rising the most steeply, and
 moving in the opposite direction. The intuition is that if you are hiking in a canyon
 and trying to descend most quickly down to the river at the bottom, you might look
 around yourself in all directions, find the direction where the ground is sloping the
 steepest, and walk downhill in that direction.
 convex For logistic regression, this loss function is conveniently convex. A convex function has at most one minimum; there are no local minima to get stuck in, so gradient
 descent starting from any point is guaranteed to find the minimum. (By contrast,
 the loss for multi-layer neural networks is non-convex, and gradient descent may
 get stuck in local minima for neural network training and never find the global optimum.)
 Although the algorithm (and the concept of gradient) are designed for direction
 vectors, let’s first consider a visualization of the case where the parameter of our
 system is just a single scalar w, shown in Fig. 4.4.
 Given a random initialization of w at some value w1 , and assuming the loss
 function L happened to have the shape in Fig. 4.4, we need the algorithm to tell us
 whether at the next iteration we should move left (making w2 smaller than w1 ) or
 right (making w2 bigger than w1 ) to reach the minimum.

 Loss

 one step
 of gradient
 slope of loss at w1 descent
 is negative

 w1 wmin w
 0 (goal)
 w in the reverse direction from the slope of the function. Since the slope is negative, we need
 to move w in a positive direction, to the right. Here superscripts are used for learning steps,
 so w1 means the initial value of w (which is 0), w2 the value at the second step, and so on.

 gradient The gradient descent algorithm answers this question by finding the gradient
 of the loss function at the current point and moving in the opposite direction. The
 gradient of a function of many variables is a vector pointing in the direction of the
 greatest increase in a function. The gradient is a multi-variable generalization of the
 slope, so for a function of one variable like the one in Fig. 4.4, we can informally
 think of the gradient as the slope. The dotted line in Fig. 4.4 shows the slope of this
 hypothetical loss function at point w = w1 . You can see that the slope of this dotted
 line is negative. Thus to find the minimum, gradient descent tells us to go in the
 opposite direction: moving w in a positive direction.
 The magnitude of the amount to move in gradient descent is the value of the
 d
learning rate slope dw L( f (x; w), y) weighted by a learning rate η. A higher (faster) learning
16 C HAPTER 4 • L OGISTIC R EGRESSION

 rate means that we should move w more on each step. The change we make in our
 parameter is the learning rate times the gradient (or the slope, in our single-variable
 example):
 d
 wt+1 = wt − η L( f (x; w), y) (4.26)
 dw
 Now let’s extend the intuition from a function of one scalar variable w to many
 variables, because we don’t just want to move left or right, we want to know where
 in the N-dimensional space (of the N parameters that make up θ ) we should move.
 The gradient is just such a vector; it expresses the directional components of the
 sharpest slope along each of those N dimensions. If we’re just imagining two weight
 dimensions (say for one weight w and one bias b), the gradient might be a vector with
 two orthogonal components, each of which tells us how much the ground slopes in
 the w dimension and in the b dimension. Fig. 4.5 shows a visualization of the value
 of a 2-dimensional gradient vector taken at the red point.
 In an actual logistic regression, the parameter vector w is much longer than 1 or
 2, since the input feature vector x can be quite long, and we need a weight wi for
 each xi . For each dimension/variable wi in w (plus the bias b), the gradient will have
 a component that tells us the slope with respect to that variable. In each dimension
 wi , we express the slope as a partial derivative ∂∂wi of the loss function. Essentially
 we’re asking: “How much would a small change in that variable wi influence the
 total loss function L?”
 Formally, then, the gradient of a multi-variable function f is a vector in which
 each component expresses the partial derivative of f with respect to one of the variables. We’ll use the inverted Greek delta symbol ∇ to refer to the gradient, and
 represent ŷ as f (x; θ ) to make the dependence on θ more obvious:
  ∂ 
 ∂ w1 L( f (x; θ ), y)
  ∂ L( f (x; θ ), y)
  ∂ w2 
 ∇L( f (x; θ ), y) = 
  .. 
  (4.27)
  . 
  ∂ 
  ∂ w L( f (x; θ ), y)
 n
 ∂
 ∂ b L( f (x; θ ), y)
 The final equation for updating θ based on the gradient is thus
 θ t+1 = θ t − η∇L( f (x; θ ), y) (4.28)

 Cost(w,b)

 b
 w
 b, showing a red arrow in the x-y plane pointing in the direction we will go to look for the
 minimum: the opposite direction of the gradient (recall that the gradient points in the direction
 of increase not decrease).
 4.7 • G RADIENT D ESCENT 17

 4.7.1 The Gradient for Logistic Regression
 In order to update θ , we need a definition for the gradient ∇L( f (x; θ ), y). Recall that
 for logistic regression, the cross-entropy loss function is:
 LCE (ŷ, y) = − [y log σ (w · x + b) + (1 − y) log (1 − σ (w · x + b))] (4.29)

 It turns out that the derivative of this function for one observation vector x is Eq. 4.30
 (the interested reader can see Section 4.15 for the derivation of this equation):
 ∂ LCE (ŷ, y)
 = [σ (w · x + b) − y]x j
 ∂wj
 = (ŷ − y)x j (4.30)

 You’ll also sometimes see this equation in the equivalent form:
 ∂ LCE (ŷ, y)
 = −(y − ŷ)x j (4.31)
 ∂wj
 Note in these equations that the gradient with respect to a single weight w j represents a very intuitive value: the difference between the true y and our estimated
 ŷ = σ (w · x + b) for that observation, multiplied by the corresponding input value
 x j.

 4.7.2 The Stochastic Gradient Descent Algorithm
 Stochastic gradient descent is an online algorithm that minimizes the loss function
 by computing its gradient after each training example, and nudging θ in the right
 direction (the opposite direction of the gradient). (An “online algorithm” is one that
 processes its input example by example, rather than waiting until it sees the entire
 input.) Stochastic gradient descent is called stochastic because it chooses a single
 random example at a time; in Section 4.7.4 we’ll discuss other versions of gradient
 descent that batch many examples at once. Fig. 4.6 shows the algorithm.
hyperparameter The learning rate η is a hyperparameter that must be adjusted. If it’s too high,
 the learner will take steps that are too large, overshooting the minimum of the loss
 function. If it’s too low, the learner will take steps that are too small, and take too
 long to get to the minimum. It is common to start with a higher learning rate and then
 slowly decrease it, so that it is a function of the iteration k of training; the notation
 ηk can be used to mean the value of the learning rate at iteration k.
 We’ll discuss hyperparameters in more detail in Chapter 6, but in short, they are
 a special kind of parameter for any machine learning model. Unlike regular parameters of a model (weights like w and b), which are learned by the algorithm from
 the training set, hyperparameters are special parameters chosen by the algorithm
 designer that affect how the algorithm works.

 4.7.3 Working through an example
 Let’s walk through a single step of the gradient descent algorithm. We’ll use a
 simplified version of the example in Fig. 4.2 as it sees a single observation x, whose
 correct value is y = 1 (this is a positive review), and with a feature vector x = [x1 , x2 ]
 consisting of these two features:
 x1 = 3 (count of positive lexicon words)
 x2 = 2 (count of negative lexicon words)
18 C HAPTER 4 • L OGISTIC R EGRESSION

 function S TOCHASTIC G RADIENT D ESCENT(L(), f (), x, y) returns θ
 # where: L is the loss function
 # f is a function parameterized by θ
 # x is the set of training inputs x(1) , x(2) , ..., x(m)
 # y is the set of training outputs (labels) y(1) , y(2) , ..., y(m)

 θ ←0 # (or small random values)
 repeat til done # see caption
 For each training tuple (x(i) , y(i) ) (in random order)
 1. Optional (for reporting): # How are we doing on this tuple?
 Compute ŷ (i) = f (x(i) ; θ ) # What is our estimated output ŷ?
 Compute the loss L(ŷ (i) , y(i) ) # How far off is ŷ(i) from the true output y(i) ?
 2. g ← ∇θ L( f (x(i) ; θ ), y(i) ) # How should we move θ to maximize loss?
 3. θ ← θ − η g # Go the other way instead
 return θ

 mainly to report how well we are doing on the current tuple; we don’t need to compute the
 loss in order to compute the gradient. The algorithm can terminate when it converges (when
 the gradient norm < ), or when progress halts (for example when the loss starts going up on
 a held-out set). Weights are initialized to 0 for logistic regression, but to small random values
 for neural networks, as we’ll see in Chapter 6.

 Let’s assume the initial weights and bias in θ 0 are all set to 0, and the initial learning
 rate η is 0.1:

 w1 = w2 = b = 0
 η = 0.1

 The single update step requires that we compute the gradient, multiplied by the
 learning rate

 θ t+1 = θ t − η∇θ L( f (x(i) ; θ ), y(i) )

 In our mini example there are three parameters, so the gradient vector has 3 dimensions, for w1 , w2 , and b. We can compute the first gradient as follows:
  ∂ LCE (ŷ,y)         
 ∂ w1 (σ (w · x + b) − y)x1 (σ (0) − 1)x1 −0.5x1 −1.5
 (ŷ,y) 
∇w,b L =  ∂ LCE  =  (σ (w · x + b) − y)x2  =  (σ (0) − 1)x2  =  −0.5x2  =  −1.0 
 
 ∂ w2
 ∂ LCE (ŷ,y) σ (w · x + b) − y σ (0) − 1 −0.5 −0.5
 ∂b

 Now that we have a gradient, we compute the new parameter vector θ 1 by moving
 θ 0 in the opposite direction from the gradient:
      
 w1 −1.5 .15
 θ 1 =  w2  − η  −1.0  =  .1 
 b −0.5 .05

 So after one step of gradient descent, the weights have shifted to be: w1 = .15,
 w2 = .1, and b = .05.
 Note that this observation x happened to be a positive example. We would expect
 that after seeing more negative examples with high counts of negative words, that
 the weight w2 would shift to have a negative value.
 4.7 • G RADIENT D ESCENT 19

 4.7.4 Mini-batch training
 Stochastic gradient descent is called stochastic because it chooses a single random
 example at a time, moving the weights so as to improve performance on that single
 example. That can result in very choppy movements, so it’s common to compute the
 gradient over batches of training instances rather than a single instance.
batch training For example in batch training we compute the gradient over the entire dataset.
 By seeing so many examples, batch training offers a superb estimate of which direction to move the weights, at the cost of spending a lot of time processing every
 single example in the training set to compute this perfect direction.
 mini-batch A compromise is mini-batch training: we train on a group of m examples (perhaps 512, or 1024) that is less than the whole dataset. (If m is the size of the dataset,
 then we are doing batch gradient descent; if m = 1, we are back to doing stochastic gradient descent.) Mini-batch training also has the advantage of computational
 efficiency. The mini-batches can easily be vectorized, choosing the size of the minibatch based on the computational resources. This allows us to process all the examples in one mini-batch in parallel and then accumulate the loss, something that’s not
 possible with individual or batch training.
 We just need to define mini-batch versions of the cross-entropy loss function
 we defined in Section 4.6 and the gradient in Section 4.7.1. Let’s extend the crossentropy loss for one example from Eq. 4.23 to mini-batches of size m. We’ll continue
 to use the notation that x(i) and y(i) mean the ith training features and training label,
 respectively. We make the assumption that the training examples are independent:
 m
 Y
 log p(training labels) = log p(y(i) |x(i) )
 i=1
 m
 X
 = log p(y(i) |x(i) )
 i=1
 m
 X
 = − LCE (ŷ(i) , y(i) ) (4.32)
 i=1

 Now the cost function for the mini-batch of m examples is the average loss for each
 example:
 m
 1X
 Cost(ŷ, y) = LCE (ŷ(i) , y(i) )
 m
 i=1
 m
 1 X  
 = − y(i) log σ (w · x(i) + b) + (1 − y(i) ) log 1 − σ (w · x(i) + b) (4.33)
 m
 i=1

 The mini-batch gradient is the average of the individual gradients from Eq. 4.30:
 m
 ∂Cost(ŷ, y) 1 Xh i
 (i)
 = σ (w · x(i) + b) − y(i) x j (4.34)
 ∂wj m
 i=1

 Instead of using the sum notation, we can more efficiently compute the gradient
 in its matrix form, following the vectorization we saw on page 9, where we have a
 matrix X of size [m × f ] representing the m inputs in the batch, and a vector y of size
 [m × 1] representing the correct outputs:
20 C HAPTER 4 • L OGISTIC R EGRESSION

 ∂Cost(ŷ, y) 1
 = (ŷ − y)| X
 ∂w m
 = (σ (Xw + b) − y)| X (4.35)
 m

 The loss function for multinomial logistic regression generalizes the loss function
 for binary logistic regression from 2 to K classes. Recall that that the cross-entropy
 loss for binary logistic regression (repeated from Eq. 4.23) is:

 LCE (ŷ, y) = − log p(y|x) = − [y log ŷ + (1 − y) log(1 − ŷ)] (4.36)

 The loss function for multinomial logistic regression generalizes the two terms in
 Eq. 4.36 (one that is non-zero when y = 1 and one that is non-zero when y = 0) to
 K terms. As we mentioned above, for multinomial regression we’ll represent both y
 and ŷ as vectors. The true label y is a vector with K elements, each corresponding
 to a class, with yc = 1 if the correct class is c, with all other elements of y being 0.
 And our classifier will produce an estimate vector with K elements ŷ, each element
 ŷk of which represents the estimated probability p(yk = 1|x).
 The loss function for a single example x, generalizing from binary logistic regression, is the sum of the logs of the K output classes, each weighted by the indicator function yk (Eq. 4.37). This turns out to be just the negative log probability of
 the correct class c (Eq. 4.38):
 K
 X
 LCE (ŷ, y) = − yk log ŷk (4.37)
 k=1

 = − log ŷc , (where c is the correct class) (4.38)
 = − log p̂(yc = 1|x) (where c is the correct class)
 exp (wc · x + bc )
 = − log PK (c is the correct class) (4.39)
 j=1 exp (wj · x + b j )

 How did we get from Eq. 4.37 to Eq. 4.38? Because only one class (let’s call it c) is
 the correct one, the vector y takes the value 1 only for this value of k, i.e., has yc = 1
 and y j = 0 ∀ j 6= c. That means the terms in the sum in Eq. 4.37 will all be 0 except
 for the term corresponding to the true class c. Hence the cross-entropy loss is simply
 the log of the output probability corresponding to the correct class, and we therefore
 negative log also call Eq. 4.38 the negative log likelihood loss.
 likelihood loss
 Of course for gradient descent we don’t need the loss, we need its gradient. The
 gradient for a single example turns out to be very similar to the gradient for binary
 logistic regression, (ŷ − y)x, that we saw in Eq. 4.30. Let’s consider one piece of the
 gradient, the derivative for a single weight. For each class k, the weight of the ith
 element of input x is wk,i . What is the partial derivative of the loss with respect to
 wk,i ? This derivative turns out to be just the difference between the true value for the
 class k (which is either 1 or 0) and the probability the classifier outputs for class k,
 weighted by the value of the input xi corresponding to the ith element of the weight
 4.9 • E VALUATION : P RECISION , R ECALL , F- MEASURE 21

 vector for class k:
 ∂ LCE
 = −(yk − ŷk )xi
 ∂ wk,i
 = −(yk − p(yk = 1|x))xi
 !
 exp (wk · x + bk )
 = − yk − PK xi (4.40)
 j=1 exp (wj · x + b j )

 We’ll return to this case of the gradient for softmax regression when we introduce
 neural networks in Chapter 6, and at that time we’ll also discuss the derivation of
 this gradient in equations Eq. ??–Eq. ??.

 To introduce the methods for evaluating text classification, let’s first consider some
 simple binary detection tasks. For example, in spam detection, our goal is to label
 every text as being in the spam category (“positive”) or not in the spam category
 (“negative”). For each item (email document) we therefore need to know whether
 our system called it spam or not. We also need to know whether the email is actually
 spam or not, i.e. the human-defined labels for each document that we are trying to
 gold labels match. We will refer to these human labels as the gold labels.
 Or imagine you’re the CEO of the Delicious Pie Company and you need to know
 what people are saying about your pies on social media, so you build a system that
 detects tweets concerning Delicious Pie. Here the positive class is tweets about
 Delicious Pie and the negative class is all other tweets.
 In both cases, we need a metric for knowing how well our spam detector (or
 pie-tweet-detector) is doing. To evaluate any system for detecting things, we start
 confusion by building a confusion matrix like the one shown in Fig. 4.7. A confusion matrix
 matrix
 is a table for visualizing how an algorithm performs with respect to the human gold
 labels, using two dimensions (system output and gold labels), and each cell labeling
 a set of possible outcomes. In the spam detection case, for example, true positives
 are documents that are indeed spam (indicated by human-created gold labels) that
 our system correctly said were spam. False negatives are documents that are indeed
 spam but our system incorrectly labeled as non-spam.
 To the bottom right of the table is the equation for accuracy, which asks what
 percentage of all the observations (for the spam or pie examples that means all emails
 or tweets) our system labeled correctly. Although accuracy might seem a natural
 metric, we generally don’t use it for text classification tasks. That’s because accuracy
 doesn’t work well when the classes are unbalanced (as indeed they are with spam,
 which is a large majority of email, or with tweets, which are mainly not about pie).
 To make this more explicit, imagine that we looked at a million tweets, and
 let’s say that only 100 of them are discussing their love (or hatred) for our pie,
 while the other 999,900 are tweets about something completely unrelated. Imagine a
 simple classifier that stupidly classified every tweet as “not about pie”. This classifier
 would have 999,900 true negatives and only 100 false negatives for an accuracy of
 999,900/1,000,000 or 99.99%! What an amazing accuracy level! Surely we should
 be happy with this classifier? But of course this fabulous ‘no pie’ classifier would
 be completely useless, since it wouldn’t find a single one of the customer comments
 we are looking for. In other words, accuracy is not a good metric when the goal is
22 C HAPTER 4 • L OGISTIC R EGRESSION

 gold standard labels
 gold positive gold negative
 system system tp
 positive true positive false positive precision = tp+fp
 output
 labels system
 negative false negative true negative
 tp tp+tn
 recall = accuracy =
 tp+fn tp+fp+tn+fn

 to discover something that is rare, or at least not completely balanced in frequency,
 which is a very common situation in the world.
 That’s why instead of accuracy we generally turn to two other metrics shown in
 precision Fig. 4.7: precision and recall. Precision measures the percentage of the items that
 the system detected (i.e., the system labeled as positive) that are in fact positive (i.e.,
 are positive according to the human gold labels). Precision is defined as

 true positives
 Precision =
 true positives + false positives

 recall Recall measures the percentage of items actually present in the input that were
 correctly identified by the system. Recall is defined as

 true positives
 Recall =
 true positives + false negatives

 Precision and recall will help solve the problem with the useless “nothing is
 pie” classifier. This classifier, despite having a fabulous accuracy of 99.99%, has
 a terrible recall of 0 (since there are no true positives, and 100 false negatives, the
 recall is 0/100). You should convince yourself that the precision at finding relevant
 tweets is equally problematic. Thus precision and recall, unlike accuracy, emphasize
 true positives: finding the things that we are supposed to be looking for.
 There are many ways to define a single metric that incorporates aspects of both
 F-measure precision and recall. The simplest of these combinations is the F-measure (van
 Rijsbergen, 1975) , defined as:

 (β 2 + 1)PR
 Fβ =
 β 2P + R

 The β parameter differentially weights the importance of recall and precision,
 based perhaps on the needs of an application. Values of β > 1 favor recall, while
 values of β < 1 favor precision. When β = 1, precision and recall are equally bal-
F1 anced; this is the most frequently used metric, and is called Fβ =1 or just F1 :
 2PR
 F1 = (4.41)
 P+R
 F-measure comes from a weighted harmonic mean of precision and recall. The
 harmonic mean of a set of numbers is the reciprocal of the arithmetic mean of recip-
4.9 • E VALUATION : P RECISION , R ECALL , F- MEASURE 23

 rocals:
 n
 HarmonicMean(a1 , a2 , a3 , a4 , ..., an ) = 1 1 1 1
 (4.42)
 a1 + a2 + a3 + ... + an

 and hence F-measure is
 (β 2 + 1)PR
  
 1 1−α
 F= 1 or with β = F= (4.43)
 α P + (1 − α) R1 α β 2P + R

 Harmonic mean is used because the harmonic mean of two values is closer to the
 minimum of the two values than the arithmetic mean is. Thus it weighs the lower of
 the two numbers more heavily, which is more conservative in this situation.

 4.9.1 Evaluating with more than two classes
 Up to now we have been describing text classification tasks with only two classes.
 But lots of classification tasks in language processing have more than two classes.
 For sentiment analysis we generally have 3 classes (positive, negative, neutral) and
 even more classes are common for tasks like part-of-speech tagging, word sense
 disambiguation, semantic role labeling, emotion detection, and so on. Luckily the
 naive Bayes algorithm is already a multi-class classification algorithm.

 gold labels
 urgent normal spam
 urgent 8 10 1 precisionu=
 8+10+1
 system 60
 output normal 5 60 50 precisionn=
 5+60+50
 spam 3 30 200 precisions=
 3+30+200
 recallu = recalln = recalls =
 8 60 200
 8+5+3 10+60+30 1+50+200

 classes (c1 , c2 ), how many documents from c1 were (in)correctly assigned to c2 .

 But we’ll need to slightly modify our definitions of precision and recall. Consider the sample confusion matrix for a hypothetical 3-way one-of email categorization decision (urgent, normal, spam) shown in Fig. 4.8. The matrix shows, for
 example, that the system mistakenly labeled one spam document as urgent, and we
 have shown how to compute a distinct precision and recall value for each class. In
 order to derive a single metric that tells us how well the system is doing, we can commacroaveraging bine these values in two ways. In macroaveraging, we compute the performance
microaveraging for each class, and then average over classes. In microaveraging, we collect the decisions for all classes into a single confusion matrix, and then compute precision and
 recall from that table. Fig. 4.9 shows the confusion matrix for each class separately,
 and shows the computation of microaveraged and macroaveraged precision.
 As the figure shows, a microaverage is dominated by the more frequent class (in
 this case spam), since the counts are pooled. The macroaverage better reflects the
 statistics of the smaller classes, and so is more appropriate when performance on all
 the classes is equally important.
24 C HAPTER 4 • L OGISTIC R EGRESSION

 Class 1: Urgent Class 2: Normal Class 3: Spam Pooled
 true true true true true true true true
 urgent not normal not spam not yes no
 system system system system
 urgent 8 11 normal 60 55 spam 200 33 yes 268 99
 system system system system
 not 8 340 not 40 212 not 51 83 no 99 635
 8 60 200 microaverage = 268
 precision = = .42 precision = = .52 precision = = .86 = .73
 8+11 60+55 200+33 precision 268+99

 macroaverage = .42+.52+.86
 = .60
 precision 3

 The training and testing procedure for text classification follows what we saw with
 language modeling (Section ??): we use the training set to train the model, then use
 development the development test set (also called a devset) to perhaps tune some parameters,
 test set
 devset and in general decide what the best model is. Once we come up with what we think
 is the best model, we run it on the (hitherto unseen) test set to report its performance.
 While the use of a devset avoids overfitting the test set, having a fixed training set, devset, and test set creates another problem: in order to save lots of data
 for training, the test set (or devset) might not be large enough to be representative.
 Wouldn’t it be better if we could somehow use all our data for training and still use
cross-validation all our data for test? We can do this by cross-validation.
 In cross-validation, we choose a number k, and partition our data into k disjoint
 folds subsets called folds. Now we choose one of those k folds as a test set, train our
 classifier on the remaining k − 1 folds, and then compute the error rate on the test
 set. Then we repeat with another fold as the test set, again training on the other k − 1
 folds. We do this sampling process k times and average the test set error rate from
 these k runs to get an average error rate. If we choose k = 10, we would train 10
 different models (each on 90% of our data), test the model 10 times, and average
 10-fold these 10 values. This is called 10-fold cross-validation.
cross-validation
 The only problem with cross-validation is that because all the data is used for
 testing, we need the whole corpus to be blind; we can’t examine any of the data
 to suggest possible features and in general see what’s going on, because we’d be
 peeking at the test set, and such cheating would cause us to overestimate the performance of our system. However, looking at the corpus to understand what’s going
 on is important in designing NLP systems! What to do? For this reason, it is common to create a fixed training set and test set, then do 10-fold cross-validation inside
 the training set, but compute error rate the normal way in the test set, as shown in
 Fig. 4.10.
 4.11 • S TATISTICAL S IGNIFICANCE T ESTING 25

 Training Iterations Testing
 1 Dev Training
 2 Dev Training
 3 Dev Training
 4 Dev Training
 Test
 5 Training Dev Training
 Set
 6 Training Dev
 7 Training Dev
 8 Training Dev
 9 Training Dev
 10 Training Dev

 In building systems we often need to compare the performance of two systems. How
 can we know if the new system we just built is better than our old one? Or better
 than some other system described in the literature? This is the domain of statistical
 hypothesis testing, and in this section we introduce tests for statistical significance
 for NLP classifiers, drawing especially on the work of Dror et al. (2020) and Berg-
Kirkpatrick et al. (2012).
 Suppose we’re comparing the performance of classifiers A and B on a metric M
 such as F1 , or accuracy. Perhaps we want to know if our new sentiment classifier
 A gets a higher F1 score than our previous sentiment classifier B on a particular test
 set x. Let’s call M(A, x) the score that system A gets on test set x, and δ (x) the
 performance difference between A and B on x:

 δ (x) = M(A, x) − M(B, x) (4.44)

 We would like to know if δ (x) > 0, meaning that our logistic regression classifier
 effect size has a higher F1 than our naive Bayes classifier on x. δ (x) is called the effect size; a
 bigger δ means that A seems to be way better than B; a small δ means A seems to
 be only a little better.
 Why don’t we just check if δ (x) is positive? Suppose we do, and we find that
 the F1 score of A is higher than B’s by .04. Can we be certain that A is better? We
 cannot! That’s because A might just be accidentally better than B on this particular x.
 We need something more: we want to know if A’s superiority over B is likely to hold
 again if we checked another test set x0 , or under some other set of circumstances.
 In the paradigm of statistical hypothesis testing, we test this by formalizing two
 hypotheses.

 H0 : δ (x) ≤ 0
 H1 : δ (x) > 0 (4.45)

null hypothesis The hypothesis H0 , called the null hypothesis, supposes that δ (x) is actually negative or zero, meaning that A is not better than B. We would like to know if we can
 confidently rule out this hypothesis, and instead support H1 , that A is better.
 We do this by creating a random variable X ranging over all test sets. Now we
 ask how likely is it, if the null hypothesis H0 was correct, that among these test sets
26 C HAPTER 4 • L OGISTIC R EGRESSION

 we would encounter the value of δ (x) that we found, if we repeated the experiment
 p-value a great many times. We formalize this likelihood as the p-value: the probability,
 assuming the null hypothesis H0 is true, of seeing the δ (x) that we saw or one even
 greater
 P(δ (X) ≥ δ (x)|H0 is true) (4.46)

 So in our example, this p-value is the probability that we would see δ (x) assuming
 A is not better than B. If δ (x) is huge (let’s say A has a very respectable F1 of .9
 and B has a terrible F1 of only .2 on x), we might be surprised, since that would be
 extremely unlikely to occur if H0 were in fact true, and so the p-value would be low
 (unlikely to have such a large δ if A is in fact not better than B). But if δ (x) is very
 small, it might be less surprising to us even if H0 were true and A is not really better
 than B, and so the p-value would be higher.
 A very small p-value means that the difference we observed is very unlikely
 under the null hypothesis, and we can reject the null hypothesis. What counts as very
 small? It is common to use values like .05 or .01 as the thresholds. A value of .01
 means that if the p-value (the probability of observing the δ we saw assuming H0 is
 true) is less than .01, we reject the null hypothesis and assume that A is indeed better
 statistically
 significant than B. We say that a result (e.g., “A is better than B”) is statistically significant if
 the δ we saw has a probability that is below the threshold and we therefore reject
 this null hypothesis.
 How do we compute this probability we need for the p-value? In NLP we generally don’t use simple parametric tests like t-tests or ANOVAs that you might be
 familiar with. Parametric tests make assumptions about the distributions of the test
 statistic (such as normality) that don’t generally hold in our cases. So in NLP we
 usually use non-parametric tests based on sampling: we artificially create many versions of the experimental setup. For example, if we had lots of different test sets x0
 we could just measure all the δ (x0 ) for all the x0 . That gives us a distribution. Now
 we set a threshold (like .01) and if we see in this distribution that 99% or more of
 those deltas are smaller than the delta we observed, i.e., that p-value(x)—the probability of seeing a δ (x) as big as the one we saw—is less than .01, then we can reject
 the null hypothesis and agree that δ (x) was a sufficiently surprising difference and
 A is really a better algorithm than B.
 There are two common non-parametric tests used in NLP: approximate ranapproximate domization (Noreen, 1989) and the bootstrap test. We will describe bootstrap
 randomization
 below, showing the paired version of the test, which again is most common in NLP.
 paired Paired tests are those in which we compare two sets of observations that are aligned:
 each observation in one set can be paired with an observation in another. This happens naturally when we are comparing the performance of two systems on the same
 test set; we can pair the performance of system A on an individual observation xi
 with the performance of system B on the same xi .

 4.11.1 The Paired Bootstrap Test
 bootstrap test The bootstrap test (Efron and Tibshirani, 1993) can apply to any metric; from precision, recall, or F1 to the BLEU metric used in machine translation. The word
 bootstrapping bootstrapping refers to repeatedly drawing large numbers of samples with replacement (called bootstrap samples) from an original set. The intuition of the bootstrap
 test is that we can create many virtual test sets from an observed test set by repeatedly sampling from it. The method only makes the assumption that the sample is
 representative of the population.
 4.11 • S TATISTICAL S IGNIFICANCE T ESTING 27

 Consider a tiny text classification example with a test set x of 10 documents. The
first row of Fig. 4.11 shows the results of two classifiers (A and B) on this test set.
Each document is labeled by one of the four possibilities (A and B both right, both
wrong, A right and B wrong, A wrong and B right). A slash through a letter ( B)
means that that classifier got the answer wrong. On the first document both A and
B get the correct class (AB), while on the second document A got it right but B got
it wrong (A B). If we assume for simplicity that our metric is accuracy, A has an
accuracy of .70 and B of .50, so δ (x) is .20.
 Now we create a large number b (perhaps 105 ) of virtual test sets x(i) , each of size
n = 10. Fig. 4.11 shows a couple of examples. To create each virtual test set x(i) , we
repeatedly (n = 10 times) select a cell from row x with replacement. For example, to
create the first cell of the first virtual test set x(1) , if we happened to randomly select
the second cell of the x row, we would copy the value A B into our new cell, and
move on to create the second cell of x(1) , each time sampling (randomly choosing)
from the original x with replacement.

 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 A% B% δ ()
x AB AB  AB AB AB
  AB AB
  AB AB
  AB
  .70 .50 .20
x(1) AB AB AB AB AB AB
  AB AB AB
  AB .60 .60 .00
x(2) AB AB AB AB AB AB AB AB
  AB AB .60 .70 -.10
...
x(b)
from an initial true test set x. Each pseudo test set is created by sampling n = 10 times with
replacement; thus an individual sample is a single cell, a document with its gold label and
the correct or incorrect performance of classifiers A and B. Of course real test sets don’t have
only 10 examples, and b needs to be large as well.

 Now that we have the b test sets, providing a sampling distribution, we can do
statistics on how often A has an accidental advantage. There are various ways to
compute this advantage; here we follow the version laid out in Berg-Kirkpatrick
et al. (2012). Assuming H0 (A isn’t better than B), we would expect that δ (X),
estimated over many test sets, would be zero or negative; a much higher value would
be surprising, since H0 specifically assumes A isn’t better than B. To measure exactly
how surprising our observed δ (x) is, we would in other circumstances compute the
p-value by counting over many test sets how often δ (x(i) ) exceeds the expected zero
value by δ (x) or more:

 b
 1 X  (i) 
 p-value(x) = 1 δ (x ) − δ (x) ≥ 0
 b
 i=1

(We use the notation 1(x) to mean “1 if x is true, and 0 otherwise”.) However,
although it’s generally true that the expected value of δ (X) over many test sets,
(again assuming A isn’t better than B) is 0, this isn’t true for the bootstrapped test
sets we created. That’s because we didn’t draw these samples from a distribution
with 0 mean; we happened to create them from the original test set x, which happens
to be biased (by .20) in favor of A. So to measure how surprising is our observed
δ (x), we actually compute the p-value by counting over many test sets how often
28 C HAPTER 4 • L OGISTIC R EGRESSION

 δ (x(i) ) exceeds the expected value of δ (x) by δ (x) or more:

 b
 1 X  (i) 
 p-value(x) = 1 δ (x ) − δ (x) ≥ δ (x)
 b
 i=1
 b
 1X  
 = 1 δ (x(i) ) ≥ 2δ (x) (4.47)
 b
 i=1

 So if for example we have 10,000 test sets x(i) and a threshold of .01, and in only 47
 of the test sets do we find that A is accidentally better δ (x(i) ) ≥ 2δ (x), the resulting
 p-value of .0047 is smaller than .01, indicating that the delta we found, δ (x) is indeed
 sufficiently surprising and unlikely to have happened by accident, and we can reject
 the null hypothesis and conclude A is better than B.

 function B OOTSTRAP(test set x, num of samples b) returns p-value(x)

 Calculate δ (x) # how much better does algorithm A do than B on x
 s=0
 for i = 1 to b do
 for j = 1 to n do # Draw a bootstrap sample x(i) of size n
 Select a member of x at random and add it to x(i)
 Calculate δ (x(i) ) # how much better does algorithm A do than B on x(i)
 s ← s + 1 if δ (x(i) ) ≥ 2δ (x)
 p-value(x) ≈ bs # on what % of the b samples did algorithm A beat expectations?
 return p-value(x) # if very few did, our observed δ is probably not accidental

 (2012).

 The full algorithm for the bootstrap is shown in Fig. 4.12. It is given a test set
 x, a number of samples b, and counts the percentage of the b bootstrap test sets in
 which δ (x(i) ) > 2δ (x). This percentage then acts as a one-sided empirical p-value.

 It is important to avoid harms that may result from classifiers, harms that exist both
 for naive Bayes classifiers and for the other classification algorithms we introduce
 in later chapters.
representational One class of harms is representational harms (Crawford 2017, Blodgett et al.
 harms
 2020), harms caused by a system that demeans a social group, for example by perpetuating negative stereotypes about them. For example Kiritchenko and Mohammad (2018) examined the performance of 200 sentiment analysis systems on pairs of
 sentences that were identical except for containing either a common African American first name (like Shaniqua) or a common European American first name (like
 Stephanie), chosen from the Caliskan et al. (2017) study discussed in Chapter 5.
 They found that most systems assigned lower sentiment and more negative emotion
 to sentences with African American names, reflecting and perpetuating stereotypes
 that associate African Americans with negative emotions (Popp et al., 2003).
 4.13 • I NTERPRETING MODELS 29

 In other tasks classifiers may lead to both representational harms and other
 harms, such as silencing. For example the important text classification task of toxtoxicity icity detection is the task of detecting hate speech, abuse, harassment, or other
 detection
 kinds of toxic language. While the goal of such classifiers is to help reduce societal harm, toxicity classifiers can themselves cause harms. For example, researchers
 have shown that some widely used toxicity classifiers incorrectly flag as being toxic
 sentences that are non-toxic but simply mention identities like women (Park et al.,
 2018), blind people (Hutchinson et al., 2020) or gay people (Dixon et al., 2018;
 Dias Oliva et al., 2021), or simply use linguistic features characteristic of varieties
 like African-American Vernacular English (Sap et al. 2019, Davidson et al. 2019).
 Such false positive errors could lead to the silencing of discourse by or about these
 groups.
 These model problems can be caused by biases or other problems in the training
 data; in general, machine learning systems replicate and even amplify the biases
 in their training data. But these problems can also be caused by the labels (for
 example due to biases in the human labelers), by the resources used (like lexicons,
 or model components like pretrained embeddings), or even by model architecture
 (like what the model is trained to optimize). While the mitigation of these biases
 (for example by carefully considering the training data sources) is an important area
 of research, we currently don’t have general solutions. For this reason it’s important,
 when introducing any NLP model, to study these kinds of factors and make them
 model card clear. One way to do this is by releasing a model card (Mitchell et al., 2019) for
 each version of a model. A model card documents a machine learning model with
 information like:
 • training algorithms and parameters
 • training data sources, motivation, and preprocessing
 • evaluation data sources, motivation, and preprocessing
 • intended use and users
 • model performance across different demographic or other groups and environmental situations

 Often we want to know more than just the correct classification of an observation.
 We want to know why the classifier made the decision it did. That is, we want our
 interpretable decision to be interpretable. Interpretability can be hard to define strictly, but the
 core idea is that as humans we should know why our algorithms reach the conclusions they do. Because the features to logistic regression are often human-designed,
 one way to understand a classifier’s decision is to understand the role each feature
 plays in the decision. Logistic regression can be combined with statistical tests (the
 likelihood ratio test, or the Wald test); investigating whether a particular feature is
 significant by one of these tests, or inspecting its magnitude (how large is the weight
 w associated with the feature?) can help us interpret why the classifier made the
 decision it makes. This is enormously important for building transparent models.
 Furthermore, in addition to its use as a classifier, logistic regression in NLP and
 many other fields is widely used as an analytic tool for testing hypotheses about the
 effect of various explanatory variables (features). In text classification, perhaps we
 want to know if logically negative words (no, not, never) are more likely to be asso-
30 C HAPTER 4 • L OGISTIC R EGRESSION

 ciated with negative sentiment, or if negative reviews of movies are more likely to
 discuss the cinematography. However, in doing so it’s necessary to control for potential confounds: other factors that might influence sentiment (the movie genre, the
 year it was made, perhaps the length of the review in words). Or we might be studying the relationship between NLP-extracted linguistic features and non-linguistic
 outcomes (hospital readmissions, political outcomes, or product sales), but need to
 control for confounds (the age of the patient, the county of voting, the brand of the
 product). In such cases, logistic regression allows us to test whether some feature is
 associated with some outcome above and beyond the effect of other features.

 Numquam ponenda est pluralitas sine necessitate
 ‘Plurality should never be proposed unless needed’
 William of Occam

 There is a problem with learning weights that make the model perfectly match the
 training data. If a feature is perfectly predictive of the outcome because it happens
 to only occur in one class, it will be assigned a very high weight. The weights for
 features will attempt to perfectly fit details of the training set, in fact too perfectly,
 modeling noisy factors that just accidentally correlate with the class. This problem is
 overfitting called overfitting. A good model should be able to generalize well from the training
 generalize data to the unseen test set, but a model that overfits will have poor generalization.
 regularization To avoid overfitting, a new regularization term R(θ ) is added to the loss function in Eq. 4.25, resulting in the following loss for a batch of m examples (slightly
 rewritten from Eq. 4.25 to be maximizing log probability rather than minimizing
 loss, and removing the m1 term which doesn’t affect the argmax):

 m
 X
 θ̂ = argmax log P(y(i) |x(i) ) − αR(θ ) (4.48)
 θ i=1

 The new regularization term R(θ ) is used to penalize large weights. Thus a setting of
 the weights that matches the training data perfectly— but uses many weights with
 high values to do so—will be penalized more than a setting that matches the data
 a little less well, but does so using smaller weights. The higher the regularization
 strength parameter α, the lower the model’s weights will be, reducing its reliance on
 the training data.
 There are two common ways to compute this regularization term R(θ ). L2 reg-
L2
 regularization ularization is a quadratic function of the weight values, named because it uses the
 (square of the) L2 norm of the weight values. The L2 norm, ||θ ||2 , is the same as
 the Euclidean distance of the vector θ from the origin. If θ consists of n weights,
 then:
 n
 X
 R(θ ) = ||θ ||22 = θ j2 (4.49)
 j=1
 4.14 • A DVANCED : R EGULARIZATION 31

 The L2 regularized loss function becomes:
 " m # n
 X X
 (i) (i)
 θ̂ = argmax log P(y |x ; θ ) − α θ j2 (4.50)
 θ i=1 j=1

 L1
regularization L1 regularization is a linear function of the weight values, named after the L1 norm
 ||W ||1 , the sum of the absolute values of the weights, or Manhattan distance (the
 Manhattan distance is the distance you’d have to walk between two points in a city
 with a street grid like New York):
 n
 X
 R(θ ) = ||θ ||1 = |θi | (4.51)
 i=1

 The L1 regularized loss function becomes:
 " m # n
 X X
 (i) (i)
 θ̂ = argmax log P(y |x ; θ ) − α |θ j | (4.52)
 θ i=1 j=1

 These kinds of regularization come from statistics, where L1 regularization is called
 lasso lasso regression (Tibshirani, 1996) and L2 regularization is called ridge regression,
 ridge and both are commonly used in language processing. L2 regularization is easier to
 optimize because of its simple derivative (the derivative of θ 2 is just 2θ ), while
 L1 regularization is more complex (the derivative of |θ | is non-continuous at zero).
 But while L2 prefers weight vectors with many small weights, L1 prefers sparse
 solutions with some larger weights but many more weights set to zero. Thus L1
 regularization leads to much sparser weight vectors, that is, far fewer features.
 Both L1 and L2 regularization have Bayesian interpretations as constraints on
 the prior of how weights should look. L1 regularization can be viewed as a Laplace
 prior on the weights. L2 regularization corresponds to assuming that weights are
 distributed according to a Gaussian distribution with mean µ = 0. In a Gaussian
 or normal distribution, the further away a value is from the mean, the lower its
 probability (scaled by the variance σ ). By using a Gaussian prior on the weights, we
 are saying that weights prefer to have the value 0. A Gaussian for a weight θ j is
 !
 1 (θ j − µ j )2
 exp − (4.53)
 2σ 2j
 q
 2πσ 2 j

 If we multiply each weight by a Gaussian prior on the weight, we are thus maximizing the following constraint:
 m n
 !
 Y
 (i) (i)
 Y 1 (θ j − µ j )2
 θ̂ = argmax P(y |x ) × exp − (4.54)
 2σ 2j
 q
 θ i=1 j=1 2πσ 2 j

 which in log space, with µ = 0, and assuming 2σ 2 = 1, corresponds to
 m
 X n
 X
 (i) (i)
 θ̂ = argmax log P(y |x ) − α θ j2 (4.55)
 θ i=1 j=1

 which is in the same form as Eq. 4.50.
32 C HAPTER 4 • L OGISTIC R EGRESSION

 In this section we give the derivation of the gradient of the cross-entropy loss function LCE for logistic regression. Let’s start with some quick calculus refreshers.
 First, the derivative of ln(x):

 d 1
 ln(x) = (4.56)
 dx x
 Second, the (very elegant) derivative of the sigmoid:

 dσ (z)
 = σ (z)(1 − σ (z)) (4.57)
 dz
 chain rule Finally, the chain rule of derivatives. Suppose we are computing the derivative
 of a composite function f (x) = u(v(x)). The derivative of f (x) is the derivative of
 u(x) with respect to v(x) times the derivative of v(x) with respect to x:

 df du dv
 = · (4.58)
 dx dv dx
 First, we want to know the derivative of the loss function with respect to a single
 weight w j (we’ll need to compute it for each weight, and for the bias):

 ∂ LCE ∂
 = − [y log σ (w · x + b) + (1 − y) log (1 − σ (w · x + b))]
 ∂wj ∂wj
  
 ∂ ∂
 = − y log σ (w · x + b) + (1 − y) log [1 − σ (w · x + b)]
 ∂wj ∂wj
 (4.59)

 Next, using the chain rule, and relying on the derivative of log:

 ∂ LCE y ∂ 1−y ∂
 = − σ (w · x + b) − [1 − σ (w · x + b)]
 ∂wj σ (w · x + b) ∂ w j 1 − σ (w · x + b) ∂ w j
 (4.60)

 Rearranging terms:
  
 ∂ LCE y 1−y ∂
 = − − σ (w · x + b)
 ∂wj σ (w · x + b) 1 − σ (w · x + b) ∂ w j

 And now plugging in the derivative of the sigmoid, and using the chain rule one
 more time, we end up with Eq. 4.61:
  
 ∂ LCE y − σ (w · x + b) ∂ (w · x + b)
 = − σ (w · x + b)[1 − σ (w · x + b)]
 ∂wj σ (w · x + b)[1 − σ (w · x + b)] ∂wj
  
 y − σ (w · x + b)
 = − σ (w · x + b)[1 − σ (w · x + b)]x j
 σ (w · x + b)[1 − σ (w · x + b)]
 = −[y − σ (w · x + b)]x j
 = [σ (w · x + b) − y]x j (4.61)
 4.16 • S UMMARY 33

 This chapter introduced the logistic regression model of classification.
 • Logistic regression is a supervised machine learning classifier that extracts
 real-valued features from the input, multiplies each by a weight, sums them,
 and passes the sum through a sigmoid function to generate a probability. A
 threshold is used to make a decision.
 • Logistic regression can be used with two classes (e.g., positive and negative
 sentiment) or with multiple classes (multinomial logistic regression, for example for n-ary text classification, part-of-speech labeling, etc.).
 • Multinomial logistic regression uses the softmax function to compute probabilities.
 • The weights (vector w and bias b) are learned from a labeled training set via a
 loss function, such as the cross-entropy loss, that must be minimized.
 • Minimizing this loss function is a convex optimization problem, and iterative
 algorithms like gradient descent are used to find the optimal weights.
 • Regularization is used to avoid overfitting.
 • Logistic regression is also one of the most useful analytic tools, because of its
 ability to transparently study the importance of individual features.

Historical Notes
 Logistic regression was developed in the field of statistics, where it was used for
 the analysis of binary data by the 1960s, and was particularly common in medicine
 (Cox, 1969). Starting in the late 1970s it became widely used in linguistics as one
 of the formal foundations of the study of linguistic variation (Sankoff and Labov,
 1979).
 Nonetheless, logistic regression didn’t become common in natural language processing until the 1990s, when it seems to have appeared simultaneously from two
 directions. The first source was the neighboring fields of information retrieval and
 speech processing, both of which had made use of regression, and both of which
 lent many other statistical techniques to NLP. Indeed a very early use of logistic
 regression for document routing was one of the first NLP applications to use (LSI)
 embeddings as word representations (Schütze et al., 1995).
 At the same time in the early 1990s logistic regression was developed and apmaximum
 entropy plied to NLP at IBM Research under the name maximum entropy modeling or
 maxent (Berger et al., 1996), seemingly independent of the statistical literature. Under that name it was applied to language modeling (Rosenfeld, 1996), part-of-speech
 tagging (Ratnaparkhi, 1996), parsing (Ratnaparkhi, 1997), coreference resolution
 (Kehler, 1997), and text classification (Nigam et al., 1999).
 There are a variety of sources covering the many kinds of text classification
 tasks. For sentiment analysis see Pang and Lee (2008), and Liu and Zhang (2012).
 Stamatatos (2009) surveys authorship attribute algorithms. On language identification see Jauhiainen et al. (2019); Jaech et al. (2016) is an important early neural
 system. The task of newswire indexing was often used as a test case for text classification algorithms, based on the Reuters-21578 collection of newswire articles.
 See Manning et al. (2008) and Aggarwal and Zhai (2012) on text classification;
 classification in general is covered in machine learning textbooks (Hastie et al. 2001,
34 C HAPTER 4 • L OGISTIC R EGRESSION

 Witten and Frank 2005, Bishop 2006, Murphy 2012).
 Non-parametric methods for computing statistical significance were used first in
 NLP in the MUC competition (Chinchor et al., 1993), and even earlier in speech
 recognition (Gillick and Cox 1989, Bisani and Ney 2004). Our description of the
 bootstrap draws on the description in Berg-Kirkpatrick et al. (2012). Recent work
 has focused on issues including multiple test sets and multiple metrics (Søgaard et al.
 2014, Dror et al. 2017).
 Feature selection is a method of removing features that are unlikely to generalize
 well. Features are generally ranked by how informative they are about the classificainformation
 gain tion decision. A very common metric, information gain, tells us how many bits of
 information the presence of the word gives us for guessing the class. Other feature
 selection metrics include χ 2 , pointwise mutual information, and GINI index; see
 Yang and Pedersen (1997) for a comparison and Guyon and Elisseeff (2003) for an
 introduction to feature selection.

Exercises
 Exercises 35

Aggarwal, C. C. and C. Zhai. 2012. A survey of text classi- Hastie, T., R. J. Tibshirani, and J. H. Friedman. 2001. The
 fication algorithms. In C. C. Aggarwal and C. Zhai, eds, Elements of Statistical Learning. Springer.
 Mining text data, 163–222. Springer. Hutchinson, B., V. Prabhakaran, E. Denton, K. Webster,
Berg-Kirkpatrick, T., D. Burkett, and D. Klein. 2012. An Y. Zhong, and S. Denuyl. 2020. Social biases in NLP
 empirical investigation of statistical significance in NLP. models as barriers for persons with disabilities. ACL.
 EMNLP. Jaech, A., G. Mulcaire, S. Hathi, M. Ostendorf, and N. A.
Berger, A., S. A. Della Pietra, and V. J. Della Pietra. 1996. A Smith. 2016. Hierarchical character-word models for lanmaximum entropy approach to natural language process- guage identification. ACL Workshop on NLP for Social
 ing. Computational Linguistics, 22(1):39–71. Media.
Bisani, M. and H. Ney. 2004. Bootstrap estimates for confi- Jauhiainen, T., M. Lui, M. Zampieri, T. Baldwin, and
 dence intervals in ASR performance evaluation. ICASSP. K. Lindén. 2019. Automatic language identification in
Bishop, C. M. 2006. Pattern recognition and machine learn- texts: A survey. JAIR, 65(1):675–682.
 ing. Springer. Kehler, A. 1997. Probabilistic coreference in information
Blodgett, S. L., S. Barocas, H. Daumé III, and H. Wallach. extraction. EMNLP.
 2020. Language (technology) is power: A critical survey Kiritchenko, S. and S. M. Mohammad. 2018. Examining
 of “bias” in NLP. ACL. gender and race bias in two hundred sentiment analysis
Borges, J. L. 1964. The analytical language of john wilkins. systems. *SEM.
 In Other inquisitions 1937–1952. University of Texas Liu, B. and L. Zhang. 2012. A survey of opinion mining and
 Press. Trans. Ruth L. C. Simms. sentiment analysis. In C. C. Aggarwal and C. Zhai, eds,
Caliskan, A., J. J. Bryson, and A. Narayanan. 2017. Seman- Mining text data, 415–464. Springer.
 tics derived automatically from language corpora contain Manning, C. D., P. Raghavan, and H. Schütze. 2008. Introhuman-like biases. Science, 356(6334):183–186. duction to Information Retrieval. Cambridge.
Chinchor, N., L. Hirschman, and D. L. Lewis. 1993. Eval- Mitchell, M., S. Wu, A. Zaldivar, P. Barnes, L. Vasserman,
 uating Message Understanding systems: An analysis of B. Hutchinson, E. Spitzer, I. D. Raji, and T. Gebru. 2019.
 the third Message Understanding Conference. Computa- Model cards for model reporting. ACM FAccT.
 tional Linguistics, 19(3):409–449. Murphy, K. P. 2012. Machine learning: A probabilistic per-
Cox, D. 1969. Analysis of Binary Data. Chapman and Hall, spective. MIT Press.
 London. Nigam, K., J. D. Lafferty, and A. McCallum. 1999. Using
Crawford, K. 2017. The trouble with bias. Keynote at maximum entropy for text classification. IJCAI-99 work-
NeurIPS. shop on machine learning for information filtering.
Davidson, T., D. Bhattacharya, and I. Weber. 2019. Racial Noreen, E. W. 1989. Computer Intensive Methods for Testing
 bias in hate speech and abusive language detection Hypothesis. Wiley.
 datasets. Third Workshop on Abusive Language Online. Pang, B. and L. Lee. 2008. Opinion mining and sentiment
Dias Oliva, T., D. Antonialli, and A. Gomes. 2021. Fighting analysis. Foundations and trends in information retrieval,
 hate speech, silencing drag queens? artificial intelligence 2(1-2):1–135.
 in content moderation and risks to lgbtq voices online. Park, J. H., J. Shin, and P. Fung. 2018. Reducing gender bias
 Sexuality & Culture, 25:700–732. in abusive language detection. EMNLP.
Dixon, L., J. Li, J. Sorensen, N. Thain, and L. Vasserman. Popp, D., R. A. Donovan, M. Crawford, K. L. Marsh, and
 2018. Measuring and mitigating unintended bias in text M. Peele. 2003. Gender, race, and speech style stereoclassification. 2018 AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, types. Sex Roles, 48(7-8):317–325.
 and Society.
 Ratnaparkhi, A. 1996. A maximum entropy part-of-speech
Doumbouya, M. K. B., D. Jurafsky, and C. D. Manning. tagger. EMNLP.
 2025. Tversky neural networks: Psychologically plausible deep learning with differentiable tversky similarity. Ratnaparkhi, A. 1997. A linear observed time statistical
 ArXiv preprint. parser based on maximum entropy models. EMNLP.
Dror, R., G. Baumer, M. Bogomolov, and R. Reichart. 2017. Rosenfeld, R. 1996. A maximum entropy approach to adap-
Replicability analysis for natural language processing: tive statistical language modeling. Computer Speech and
 Testing significance with multiple datasets. TACL, 5:471– Language, 10:187–228.
 –486. Sankoff, D. and W. Labov. 1979. On the uses of variable
Dror, R., L. Peled-Cohen, S. Shlomov, and R. Reichart. rules. Language in society, 8(2-3):189–222.
 2020. Statistical Significance Testing for Natural Lan- Sap, M., D. Card, S. Gabriel, Y. Choi, and N. A. Smith. 2019.
 guage Processing, volume 45 of Synthesis Lectures on The risk of racial bias in hate speech detection. ACL.
 Human Language Technologies. Morgan & Claypool. Schütze, H., D. A. Hull, and J. Pedersen. 1995. A compar-
Efron, B. and R. J. Tibshirani. 1993. An introduction to the ison of classifiers and document representations for the
 bootstrap. CRC press. routing problem. SIGIR-95.
Gillick, L. and S. J. Cox. 1989. Some statistical issues in the Søgaard, A., A. Johannsen, B. Plank, D. Hovy, and H. M.
 comparison of speech recognition algorithms. ICASSP. Alonso. 2014. What’s in a p-value in NLP? CoNLL.
Guyon, I. and A. Elisseeff. 2003. An introduction to variable Stamatatos, E. 2009. A survey of modern authorship attribuand feature selection. JMLR, 3:1157–1182. tion methods. JASIST, 60(3):538–556.
36 Chapter 4 • Logistic Regression

Tibshirani, R. J. 1996. Regression shrinkage and selection
 via the lasso. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society. Series B (Methodological), 58(1):267–288.
van Rijsbergen, C. J. 1975. Information Retrieval. Butterworths.
Witten, I. H. and E. Frank. 2005. Data Mining: Practical Machine Learning Tools and Techniques, 2nd edition.
 Morgan Kaufmann.
Yang, Y. and J. Pedersen. 1997. A comparative study on
 feature selection in text categorization. ICML.
