rights reserved. Draft of August 24, 2025.

CHAPTER

8 Transformers

 “The true art of memory is the art of attention ”
 Samuel Johnson, Idler #74, September 1759

 In this chapter we introduce the transformer, the standard architecture for building large language models. As we discussed in the prior chapter, transformer-based
 large language models have completely changed the field of speech and language
 processing. Indeed, every subsequent chapter in this textbook will make use of them.
 As with the previous chapter, we’ll focus for this chapter on the use of transformers
 to model left-to-right (sometimes called causal or autoregressive) language modeling, in which we are given a sequence of input tokens and predict output tokens one
 by one by conditioning on the prior context.
 The transformer is a neural network with a specific structure that includes a
 mechanism called self-attention or multi-head attention.1 Attention can be thought
 of as a way to build contextual representations of a token’s meaning by attending to
 and integrating information from surrounding tokens, helping the model learn how
 tokens relate to each other over large spans.

 Next token long and thanks for all

 Language
 Modeling
 logits logits logits logits logits …
 Head U U U U U

 Stacked
 … … … … …
 Transformer …
 Blocks

 x1 x2 x3 x4 x5 …
 + 1 + 2 + 3 + 4 + 5
 Input
 Encoding E E E E E
 …

 Input tokens So long and thanks for
 get encoded, passed through a set of stacked transformer blocks, and then a language model
 head that predicts the next token.

 Fig. 8.1 sketches the transformer architecture. A transformer has three major
 components. At the center are columns of transformer blocks. Each block is a
 multilayer network (a multi-head attention layer, feedforward networks and layer
 1 Although multi-head attention developed historically from the RNN attention mechanism (Chapter 13), we’ll define attention from scratch here.
2 C HAPTER 8 • T RANSFORMERS

 normalization steps) that maps an input vector xi in column i (corresponding to input
 token i) to an output vector hi . The set of n blocks maps an entire context window
 of input vectors (x1 , ..., xn ) to a window of output vectors (h1 , ..., hn ) of the same
 length. A column might contain from 12 to 96 or more stacked blocks.
 The column of blocks is preceded by the input encoding component, which processes an input token (like the word thanks) into a contextual vector representation,
 using an embedding matrix E and a mechanism for encoding token position. Each
 column is followed by a language modeling head, which takes the embedding output by the final transformer block, passes it through an unembedding matrix U and
 a softmax over the vocabulary to generate a single token for that column.
 Transformer-based language models are complex, and so the details will unfold over the next few chapters. Chapter 7 already discussed how language models
 are pretrained, and how tokens are generated via sampling. In the next sections
 we’ll introduce multi-head attention, the rest of the transformer block, and the input
 encoding and language modeling head components of the transformer. Chapter 10
 introduces masked language modeling and the BERT family of bidirectional transformer encoder models. Chapter 9 shows how to instruction-tune language models
 to perform NLP tasks, and how to align the model with human preferences. Chapter 12 will introduce machine translation with the encoder-decoder architecture.
 We’ll see further use of the encoder-decoder architecture in Chapter 15.

 Recall from Chapter 5 that for word2vec and other static embeddings, the representation of a word’s meaning is always the same vector irrespective of the context:
 the word chicken, for example, is always represented by the same fixed vector. So
 a static vector for the word it might somehow encode that this is a pronoun used
 for animals and inanimate entities. But in context it has a much richer meaning.
 Consider it in one of these two sentences:
 (8.1) The chicken didn’t cross the road because it was too tired.
 (8.2) The chicken didn’t cross the road because it was too wide.
 In (8.1) it is the chicken (i.e., the reader knows that the chicken was tired), while
 in (8.2) it is the road (and the reader knows that the road was wide).2 That is, if
 we are to compute the meaning of this sentence, we’ll need the meaning of it to be
 associated with the chicken in the first sentence and associated with the road in
 the second one, sensitive to the context.
 Furthermore, consider reading left to right like a causal language model, processing the sentence up to the word it:
 (8.3) The chicken didn’t cross the road because it
 At this point we don’t yet know which thing it is going to end up referring to! So a
 representation of it at this point might have aspects of both chicken and road as
 the reader is trying to guess what happens next.
 This fact that words have rich linguistic relationships with other words that may
 be far away pervades language. Consider two more examples:
 (8.4) The keys to the cabinet are on the table.
 2 We say that in the first example it corefers with the chicken, and in the second it corefers with the
 road; we’ll return to this in Chapter 23.
 8.1 • ATTENTION 3

 (8.5) I walked along the pond, and noticed one of the trees along the bank.
 In (8.4), the phrase The keys is the subject of the sentence, and in English and many
 languages, must agree in grammatical number with the verb are; in this case both are
 plural. In English we can’t use a singular verb like is with a plural subject like keys
 (we’ll discuss agreement more in Chapter 18). In (8.5), we know that bank refers
 to the side of a pond or river and not a financial institution because of the context,
 including words like pond. (We’ll discuss word senses more in Chapter 10.)
 The point of all these examples is that these contextual words that help us compute the meaning of words in context can be quite far away in the sentence or paragraph. Transformers can build contextual representations of word meaning, contexcontextual
embeddings tual embeddings, by integrating the meaning of these helpful contextual words. In a
 transformer, layer by layer, we build up richer and richer contextualized representations of the meanings of input tokens. At each layer, we compute the representation
 of a token i by combining information about i from the previous layer with information about the neighboring tokens to produce a contextualized representation for
 each word at each position.
 Attention is the mechanism in the transformer that weighs and combines the
 representations from appropriate other tokens in the context from layer k to build
 the representation for tokens in layer k + 1.

 columns corresponding to input tokens
 chicken

 because
 didn’t
 cross

 tired
 Layer k+1
 road
 The

 the

 was
 too
 it

 self-attention distribution
 chicken

 because
 didn’t
 cross

 tired

 Layer k
 road
 The

 the

 was
 too
 it

 representation for the word it at layer k + 1. In computing the representation for it, we attend
 differently to the various words at layer k, with darker shades indicating higher self-attention
 values. Note that the transformer is attending highly to the columns corresponding to the
 tokens chicken and road , a sensible result, since at the point where it occurs, it could plausibly
 corefer with the chicken or the road, and hence we’d like the representation for it to draw on
 the representation for these earlier words. Figure adapted from Uszkoreit (2017).

 Fig. 8.2 shows a schematic example simplified from a transformer (Uszkoreit,
 2017). The figure describes the situation when the current token is it and we need
 to compute a contextual representation for this token at layer k +1 of the transformer,
 drawing on the representations (from layer k) of every prior token. The figure uses
 color to represent the attention distribution over the contextual words: the tokens
 chicken and road both have a high attention weight, meaning that as we are computing the representation for it, we will draw most heavily on the representation for
 chicken and road. This will be useful in building the final representation for it,
 since it will end up coreferring with either chicken or road.
 Let’s now turn to how this attention distribution is represented and computed.
4 C HAPTER 8 • T RANSFORMERS

 8.1.1 Attention more formally
 As we’ve said, the attention computation is a way to compute a vector representation
 for a token at a particular layer of a transformer, by selectively attending to and
 integrating information from prior tokens at the previous layer. Attention takes an
 input representation xi corresponding to the input token at position i, and a context
 window of prior inputs x1 ..xi−1 , and produces an output ai .
 In causal, left-to-right language models, the context is any of the prior words.
 That is, when processing xi , the model has access to xi as well as the representations
 of all the prior tokens in the context window (context windows consist of thousands
 of tokens) but no tokens after i. (By contrast, in Chapter 10 we’ll generalize attention
 so it can also look ahead to future words.)
 Fig. 8.3 illustrates this flow of information in an entire causal self-attention layer,
 in which this same attention computation happens in parallel at each token position
 i. Thus a self-attention layer maps input sequences (x1 , ..., xn ) to output sequences
 of the same length (a1 , ..., an ).

 a1 a2 a3 a4 a5

 Self-Attention attention attention attention attention attention
 Layer

 x1 x2 x3 x4 x5

 model attends to all the inputs up to, and including xi .

 Simplified version of attention At its heart, attention is really just a weighted
 sum of context vectors, with a lot of complications added to how the weights are
 computed and what gets summed. For pedagogical purposes let’s first describe a
 simplified intuition of attention, in which the attention output ai at token position i
 is simply the weighted sum of all the representations x j , for all j ≤ i; we’ll use αi j
 to mean how much x j should contribute to ai :
 X
 Simplified version: ai = αi j x j (8.6)
 j≤i

 Each αi j is a scalar used for weighing the value of input x j when summing up
 the inputs to compute ai . How shall we compute this α weighting? In attention we
 weight each prior embedding proportionally to how similar it is to the current token
 i. So the output of attention is a sum of the embeddings of prior tokens weighted
 by their similarity with the current token embedding. We compute similarity scores
 via dot product, which maps two vectors into a scalar value ranging from −∞ to
 ∞. The larger the score, the more similar the vectors that are being compared. We’ll
 normalize these scores with a softmax to create the vector of weights αi j , j ≤ i.

 Simplified Version: score(xi , x j ) = xi · x j (8.7)
 αi j = softmax(score(xi , x j )) ∀ j ≤ i (8.8)

 Thus in Fig. 8.3 we compute a3 by computing three scores: x3 · x1 , x3 · x2 and x3 · x3 ,
 normalizing them by a softmax, and using the resulting probabilities as weights
 indicating each of their proportional relevance to the current position i. Of course,
 8.1 • ATTENTION 5

 the softmax weight will likely be highest for xi , since xi is very similar to itself,
 resulting in a high dot product. But other context words may also be similar to i, and
 the softmax will also assign some weight to those words. Then we use these weights
 as the α values in Eq. 8.6 to compute the weighted sum that is our a3 .
 The simplified attention in equations 8.6 – 8.8 demonstrates the attention-based
 approach to computing ai : compare the xi to prior vectors, normalize those scores
 into a probability distribution used to weight the sum of the prior vector. But now
 we’re ready to remove the simplifications.
 A single attention head using query, key, and value matrices Now that we’ve
attention head seen a simple intuition of attention, let’s introduce the actual attention head, the
 head version of attention that’s used in transformers. (The word head is often used in
 transformers to refer to specific structured layers). The attention head allows us to
 distinctly represent three different roles that each input embedding plays during the
 course of the attention process:
 • As the current element being compared to the preceding inputs. We’ll refer to
 query this role as a query.
 • In its role as a preceding input that is being compared to the current element
 key to determine a similarity weight. We’ll refer to this role as a key.
 value • And finally, as a value of a preceding element that gets weighted and summed
 up to compute the output for the current element.
 To capture these three different roles, transformers introduce weight matrices
 WQ , WK , and WV . These weights will project each input vector xi into a representation of its role as a query, key, or value:

 qi = xi WQ ; ki = xi WK ; vi = xi WV (8.9)

 Given these projections, when we are computing the similarity of the current element xi with some prior element x j , we’ll use the dot product between the current
 element’s query vector qi and the preceding element’s key vector k j . Furthermore,
 the result of a dot product can be an arbitrarily large (positive or negative) value, and
 exponentiating large values can lead to numerical issues and loss of gradients during
 training. To avoid this, we scale the dot product by a factor related to the size of the
 embeddings, via dividing by the square root of the dimensionality of the query and
 key vectors (dk ). We thus replace the simplified Eq. 8.7 with Eq. 8.11. The ensuing
 softmax calculation resulting in αi j remains the same, but the output calculation for
 headi is now based on a weighted sum over the value vectors v (Eq. 8.13).
 Here’s a final set of equations for computing self-attention for a single selfattention output vector ai from a single input vector xi . This version of attention
 computes ai by summing the values of the prior elements, each weighted by the
 similarity of its key to the query from the current element:

 qi = xi WQ ; k j = x j WK ; v j = x j WV (8.10)
 qi · k j
 score(xi , x j ) = √ (8.11)
 dk
 αi j = softmax(score(xi , x j )) ∀ j ≤ i (8.12)
 X
 headi = αi j v j (8.13)
 j≤i

 ai = headi WO (8.14)
6 C HAPTER 8 • T RANSFORMERS

 8. Output of self-attention a3 [1 × d]

 7. Reshape to [1 x d] WO [dv × d]

 [1 × dv]
 6. Sum the weighted
 value vectors

 [1 × dv] [1 × dv] [1 × dv]

 𝛼3,1 𝛼3,2 𝛼3,3
 5. Weigh each value vector

 ×
 ×
 4. Turn into 𝛼i,j weights via softmax

 3. Divide scalar score by √dk √d ÷ √dk
 ÷
 √dk
 ÷
 k

 2. Compare x3’s query with
 the keys for x1, x2, and x3
 [1 × dv] [1 × dv] [1 x dv]

 1. Generate k q v k q v k q v
 key, query, value WK WQ WV WK WQ WV WK WQ WV
 vectors

 x1 x2 x3
 [1 × d] [1 × d] [1 × d]

 We illustrate this in Fig. 8.4 for the case of calculating the value of the third output
 a3 in a sequence.
 Note that we’ve also introduced one more matrix, WO , which is right-multiplied
 by the attention head. This is necessary to reshape the output of the head. The input
 to attention xi and the output from attention ai both have the same dimensionality
 [1 × d]. We often call d the model dimensionality, and indeed as we’ll discuss in
 Section 8.2 the output hi of each transformer block, as well as the intermediate vectors inside the transformer block also have the same dimensionality [1 × d]. Having
 everything be the same dimensionality makes the transformer very modular.
 So let’s talk shapes. How do we get from [1 × d] at the input to [1 × d] at the
 output? Let’s look at all the internal shapes. We’ll have a dimension dk for the
 query and key vectors. The query vector and the key vector are both dimensionality
 [1 × dk ], so we can take their dot product qi · k j to produce a scalar. We’ll have a
 separate dimension dv for the value vectors. The transform matrix WQ has shape
 [d × dk ], WK is [d × dk ], and WV is [d × dv ]. So the output of headi in equation
 Eq. 8.13 is of shape [1 × dv ]. To get the desired output shape [1 × d] we’ll need to
 reshape the head output, and so WO is of shape [dv × d]. In the original transformer
 work (Vaswani et al., 2017), d was 512, dk and dv were both 64.
 Multi-head Attention Equations 8.11-8.13 describe a single attention head. But
 actually, transformers use multiple attention heads. The intuition is that each head
 might be attending to the context for different purposes: heads might be specialized to represent different linguistic relationships between context elements and the
 current token, or to look for particular kinds of patterns in the context.
 multi-head So in multi-head attention we have A separate attention heads that reside in
 attention
 parallel layers at the same depth in a model, each with its own set of parameters that
 allows the head to model different aspects of the relationships among inputs. Thus
 8.2 • T RANSFORMER B LOCKS 7

 each head i in a self-attention layer has its own set of query, key, and value matrices:
 WQi , WKi , and WVi . These are used to project the inputs into separate query, key,
 and value embeddings for each head.
 When using multiple heads the model dimension d is still used for the input
 and output, the query and key embeddings have dimensionality dk , and the value
 embeddings are of dimensionality dv (again, in the original transformer paper dk =
 dv = 64, A = 8, and d = 512). Thus for each head i, we have weight layers WQi of
 shape [d × dk ], WKi of shape [d × dk ], and WVi of shape [d × dv ].
 Below are the equations for attention augmented with multiple heads; Fig. 8.5
 shows an intuition.
 qci = xi WQc ; kcj = x j WKc ; vcj = x j WVc ; ∀ c 1 ≤ c ≤ A (8.15)
 qci · kcj
 scorec (xi , x j ) = √ (8.16)
 dk
 αicj = softmax(scorec (xi , x j )) ∀ j ≤ i (8.17)

 headci = αicj vcj
 X
 (8.18)
 j≤i

 ai = (head1 ⊕ head2 ... ⊕ headA )WO (8.19)
 MultiHeadAttention(xi , [x1 , · · · , xi−1 ]) = ai (8.20)

 Note in Eq. 8.20 that MultiHeadAttention is a function of the current input xi , as
 well as all the other inputs. For the causal or left-to-right attention that we use in
 this chapter, the other inputs are only to the left, but we’ll also see a version of
 attention in Chapter 10 where attention is a function of the tokens to the right as
 well. We’ll return to this idea about causal inputs in Eq. 8.34 when we introduce the
 idea of masking the right context.
 The output of each of the A heads is of shape [1 × dv ], and so the output of the
 multi-head layer with A heads consists of A vectors of shape [1 × dv ]. These are
 concatenated to produce a single output with dimensionality [1 × Adv ]. Then we use
 yet another linear projection WO ∈ RAdv ×d to reshape it, resulting in the multi-head
 attention vector ai with the correct output shape [1 × d] at each input i.

 The self-attention calculation lies at the core of what’s called a transformer block,
 which, in addition to the self-attention layer, includes three other kinds of layers: (1)
 a feedforward layer, (2) residual connections, and (3) normalizing layers (colloquially called “layer norm”).
 Fig. 8.6 illustrates a transformer block, sketching a common way of thinking
residual stream about the block that is called the residual stream (Elhage et al., 2021). In the residual stream viewpoint, we consider the processing of an individual token i through
 the transformer block as a single stream of d-dimensional representations for token
 position i. This residual stream starts with the original input vector, and the various
 components read their input from the residual stream and add their output back into
 the stream.
 The input at the bottom of the stream is an embedding for a token, which has
 dimensionality d. This initial embedding gets passed up (by residual connections),
 and is progressively added to by the other components of the transformer: the at-
8 C HAPTER 8 • T RANSFORMERS

 ai
 [1 x d]
 Project down to d WO [Adv x d]
 … [1 x Adv ]
 Concatenate Outputs

 [1 x dv ] [1 x dv ]
 Each head Head 1 Head 2 Head 8
 attends diﬀerently …
 WK1 WV1 WQ1 WK2 WV2 WQ2 WK8 WV8 WQ8
 to context

 … xi-3 xi-2 xi-1 xi [1 ax d]
 i
layer has A heads, each with its own query, key, and value weight matrices. The outputs from each of the heads
are concatenated and then projected down to d, thus producing an output of the same size as the input.

 hi-1 hi hi+1
 Residual
 Stream

 Feedforward

 Layer Norm
 … …
 MultiHead
 Attention

 Layer Norm

 xi-1 xi xi+1

 figure shows the prenorm version of the architecture, in which the layer norms happen before
 the attention and feedforward layers rather than after.

 tention layer that we have seen, and the feedforward layer that we will introduce.
 Before the attention and feedforward layer is a computation called the layer norm.
 Thus the initial vector is passed through a layer norm and attention layer, and
 the result is added back into the stream, in this case to the original input vector
 xi . And then this summed vector is again passed through another layer norm and a
 feedforward layer, and the output of those is added back into the residual, and we’ll
 use hi to refer to the resulting output of the transformer block for token i. (In earlier
 descriptions the residual stream was often described using a different metaphor as
 residual connections that add the input of a component to its output, but the residual
 stream is a more perspicuous way of visualizing the transformer.)
 8.2 • T RANSFORMER B LOCKS 9

 We’ve already seen the attention layer, so let’s now introduce the feedforward
 and layer norm computations in the context of processing a single input xi at token
 position i.

 Feedforward layer The feedforward layer is a fully-connected 2-layer network,
 i.e., one hidden layer, two weight matrices, as introduced in Chapter 6. The weights
 are the same for each token position i, but are different from layer to layer. It is common to make the dimensionality dff of the hidden layer of the feedforward network
 be larger than the model dimensionality d. (For example in the original transformer
 model, d = 512 and dff = 2048.)

 FFN(xi ) = ReLU(xi W1 + b1 )W2 + b2 (8.21)

 Layer Norm At two stages in the transformer block we normalize the vector (Ba
layer norm et al., 2016). This process, called layer norm (short for layer normalization), is one
 of many forms of normalization that can be used to improve training performance
 in deep neural networks by keeping the values of a hidden layer in a range that
 facilitates gradient-based training.
 Layer norm is a variation of the z-score from statistics, applied to a single vector in a hidden layer. That is, the term layer norm is a bit confusing; layer norm
 is not applied to an entire transformer layer, but just to the embedding vector of a
 single token. Thus the input to layer norm is a single vector of dimensionality d
 and the output is that vector normalized, again of dimensionality d. The first step in
 layer normalization is to calculate the mean, µ, and standard deviation, σ , over the
 elements of the vector to be normalized. Given an embedding vector x of dimensionality d, these values are calculated as follows.

 d
 1X
 µ = xi (8.22)
 d
 i=1
 v
 u d
 u1 X
 σ = t (xi − µ)2 (8.23)
 d
 i=1

 Given these values, the vector components are normalized by subtracting the mean
 from each and dividing by the standard deviation. The result of this computation is
 a new vector with zero mean and a standard deviation of one.

 (x − µ)
 x̂ = (8.24)
 σ

 Finally, in the standard implementation of layer normalization, two learnable parameters, γ and β , representing gain and offset values, are introduced.

 (x − µ)
 LayerNorm(x) = γ +β (8.25)
 σ

 Putting it all together The function computed by a transformer block can be expressed by breaking it down with one equation for each component computation,
 using t (of shape [1 × d]) to stand for transformer and superscripts to demarcate
10 C HAPTER 8 • T RANSFORMERS

 each computation inside the block:

 t1i = LayerNorm(xi ) (8.26)
 = MultiHeadAttention(ti , t11 , · · · , t1N )
  
 ti (8.27)
 3 2
 ti = ti + xi (8.28)
 ti = LayerNorm(ti )
 4 3
 (8.29)
 t5i = FFN(t4i ) (8.30)
 5 3
 hi = ti + ti (8.31)

 Notice that the only component that takes as input information from other tokens
 (other residual streams) is multi-head attention, which (as we see from Eq. 8.27)
 looks at all the neighboring tokens in the context. The output from attention, however, is then added into this token’s embedding stream. In fact, Elhage et al. (2021)
 show that we can view attention heads as literally moving information from the
 residual stream of a neighboring token into the current stream. The high-dimensional
 embedding space at each position thus contains information about the current token and about neighboring tokens, albeit in different subspaces of the vector space.
 Fig. 8.7 shows a visualization of this movement.

 Token A Token B
 residual residual
 stream stream

 token B’s residual stream.

 Crucially, the input and output dimensions of transformer blocks are matched so
 they can be stacked. Each token vector xi at the input to the block has dimensionality
 d, and the output hi also has dimensionality d. Transformers for large language
 models stack many of these blocks, from 12 layers (used for the T5 or GPT-3-small
 language models) to 96 layers (used for GPT-3 large), to even more for more recent
 models. We’ll come back to this issue of stacking in a bit.
 Equation 8.26 and following are just the equation for a single transformer block,
 but the residual stream metaphor goes through all the transformer layers, from the
 first transformer blocks to the 12th, in a 12-layer transformer. At the earlier transformer blocks, the residual stream is representing the current token. At the highest
 transformer blocks, the residual stream is usually representing the following token,
 since at the very end it’s being trained to predict the next token.
 Once we stack many blocks, there is one more requirement: at the very end of
 the last (highest) transformer block, there is a single extra layer norm that is run on
 the last hi of each token stream (just below the language model head layer that we
 will define soon). 3
 3 Note that we are using the most common current transformer architecture, which is called the prenorm
 8.3 • PARALLELIZING COMPUTATION USING A SINGLE MATRIX X 11

 This description of multi-head attention and the rest of the transformer block has
 been from the perspective of computing a single output at a single time step i in
 a single residual stream. But as we pointed out earlier, the attention computation
 performed for each token to compute ai is independent of the computation for each
 other token, and that’s also true for all the computation in the transformer block
 computing hi from the input xi . That means we can easily parallelize the entire
 computation, taking advantage of efficient matrix multiplication routines.
 We do this by packing the input embeddings for the N tokens of the input sequence into a single matrix X of size [N × d]. Each row of X is the embedding of
 one token of the input. Transformers for large language models commonly have an
 input length N from 1K to 32K; much longer contexts of 128K or even up to millions
 of tokens can also be achieved with architectural changes like special long-context
 mechanisms that we don’t discuss here. So for vanilla transformers, we can think of
 X having between 1K and 32K rows, each of the dimensionality of the embedding
 d (the model dimension).
 Parallelizing attention Let’s first see this for a single attention head and then turn
 to multiple heads, and then add in the rest of the components in the transformer
 block. For one head we multiply X by the query, key, and value matrices WQ of
 shape [d × dk ], WK of shape [d × dk ], and WV of shape [d × dv ], to produce matrices
 Q of shape [N × dk ], K of shape [N × dk ], and V of shape [N × dv ], containing all the
 key, query, and value vectors:

 Q = XWQ ; K = XWK ; V = XWV (8.32)

 Given these matrices we can compute all the requisite query-key comparisons simultaneously by multiplying Q and K| in a single matrix multiplication. The product is
 of shape N × N, visualized in Fig. 8.8.

 q1•k1 q1•k2 q1•k3 q1•k4

 q2•k1 q2•k2 q2•k3 q2•k4
 N
 q3•k1 q3•k2 q3•k3 q3•k4

 q4•k1 q4•k2 q4•k3 q4•k4

 N

 single matrix multiple.

 Once we have this QK| matrix, we can very efficiently scale these scores, take
 the softmax, and then multiply the result by V resulting in a matrix of shape N × d:
 a vector embedding representation for each token in the input. We’ve reduced the
 entire self-attention step for an entire sequence of N tokens for one head to the
 architecture. The original definition of the transformer in Vaswani et al. (2017) used an alternative architecture called the postnorm transformer in which the layer norm happens after the attention and FFN
 layers; it turns out moving the layer norm beforehand works better, but does require this one extra layer
 at the end.
12 C HAPTER 8 • T RANSFORMERS

 following computation:

 QK|
   
 head = softmax mask √ V (8.33)
 dk
 A = head WO (8.34)

 Masking out the future You may have noticed that we introduced a mask function
 in Eq. 8.34 above. This is because the self-attention computation as we’ve described
 it has a problem: the calculation of QK| results in a score for each query value to
 every key value, including those that follow the query. This is inappropriate in the
 setting of language modeling: guessing the next word is pretty simple if you already
 know it! To fix this, the elements in the upper-triangular portion of the matrix are set
 to −∞, which the softmax will turn to zero, thus eliminating any knowledge of words
 that follow in the sequence. This is done in practice by adding a mask matrix M in
 which Mi j = −∞ ∀ j > i (i.e. for the upper-triangular portion) and Mi j = 0 otherwise.
 Fig. 8.9 shows the resulting masked QK| matrix. (we’ll see in Chapter 10 how to
 make use of words in the future for tasks that need it).

 q1•k1 −∞ −∞ −∞

 q2•k1 q2•k2 −∞ −∞
 N
 q3•k1 q3•k2 q3•k3 −∞

 q4•k1 q4•k2 q4•k3 q4•k4

 N

 Fig. 8.10 shows a schematic of all the computations for a single attention head
 parallelized in matrix form.
 Fig. 8.8 and Fig. 8.9 also make it clear that attention is quadratic in the length
 of the input, since at each layer we need to compute dot products between each pair
 of tokens in the input. This makes it expensive to compute attention over very long
 documents (like entire novels). Nonetheless modern large language models manage
 to use quite long contexts of thousands or tens of thousands of tokens.

 Parallelizing multi-head attention In multi-head attention, as with self-attention,
 the input and output have the model dimension d, the key and query embeddings
 have dimensionality dk , and the value embeddings are of dimensionality dv (again,
 in the original transformer paper dk = dv = 64, A = 8, and d = 512). Thus for
 each head c, we have weight layers WQ c of shape [d × dk ], WK c of shape [d × dk ],
 and WV c of shape [d × dv ], and these get multiplied by the inputs packed into X to
 produce Q of shape [N × dk ], K of shape [N × dk ], and V of shape [N × dv ]. The
 output of each of the A heads is of shape [N × dv ], and so the output of the multihead layer with A heads consists of A matrices of shape [N × dv ]. To make use
 of these matrices in further processing, they are concatenated to produce a single
 output with dimensionality [N × Adv ]. Finally, we use a final linear projection WO
 of shape [Adv × d], that reshapes it to the original output dimension for each token.
 Multiplying the concatenated [N × Adv ] matrix output by WO of shape [Adv × d]
 8.3 • PARALLELIZING COMPUTATION USING A SINGLE MATRIX X 13

 X Q X K X V
 Input
 WQ Query Input WK Key Input WV Value
 Token 1 Token 1 Token 1 Token 1 Token 1
 Token 1
 Input Input Key Input Value
 Query
 Token 2 Token 2 Token 2 Token 2
 Input x =
 Token 2
 x = Key
 x =
 Token 2
 Query Input Input Value
 Token 3 Token 3 Token 3 Token 3 Token 3
 Token 3
 Input Input Key Input Value
 Query
 Token 4 Token 4 Token 4 Token 4
 Token 4 d x dk d x dv Token 4
 d x dk
 Nxd N x dk Nxd N x dk N x dv
 Nxd

 Q KT QKT QKT masked V A

 q1
 x = −∞ −∞ −∞ v1 a1
 k1

 k2

 k3

 k4

 q1•k1 q1•k2 q1•k3 q1•k4 q1•k1
 q1•k1

 mask q2 q2•k1 q2•k2 q2•k3 q2•k4 = q2•k1 q2•k2 −∞ −∞ x v2 = a2

 q3 q3•k1 q3•k2 q3•k3 q3•k4 q3•k1 q3•k2 q3•k3 −∞ v3 a3

 q4 dk x N q4•k1 q4•k2 q4•k3 q4•k4 q4•k1 q4•k2 q4•k3 q4•k4 v4 a4

 N x dk NxN NxN N x dv N x dv

the computation of the Q, K, and V matrices. The second row shows the computation of QKT , the masking
(the softmax computation and the normalizing by dimensionality are not shown) and then the weighted sum of
the value vectors to get the final attention vectors.

 yields the self-attention output A of shape [N × d].

 Qi = XWQi ; Ki = XWKi ; Vi = XWVi (8.35)
   i i | 
 QK
 headi = SelfAttention(Q , K , V ) = softmax mask √
 i i i
 Vi (8.36)
 dk
 MultiHeadAttention(X) = (head1 ⊕ head2 ... ⊕ headA )WO (8.37)

 Putting it all together with the parallel input matrix X The function computed
 in parallel by an entire layer of N transformer blocks—each block over one of the N
 input tokens—can be expressed as:

 O = X + MultiHeadAttention(LayerNorm(X)) (8.38)
 H = O + FFN(LayerNorm(O)) (8.39)

 Note that in Eq. 8.38 we are using X to mean the input to the layer, wherever it
 comes from. For the first layer, as we will see in the next section, that input is the
 initial word + positional embedding vectors that we have been describing by X. But
 for subsequent layers k, the input is the output from the previous layer Hk−1 . We
 can also break down the computation performed in a transformer layer, showing one
 equation for each component computation. We’ll use T (of shape [N × d]) to stand
 for transformer and superscripts to demarcate each computation inside the block,
 and again use X to mean the input to the block from the previous layer or the initial
14 C HAPTER 8 • T RANSFORMERS

 embedding:

 T1 = LayerNorm(X) (8.40)
 T 2
 = MultiHeadAttention(T )
 (8.41)
 T3 = T2 + X (8.42)
 T4 = LayerNorm(T3 ) (8.43)
 T 5
 = FFN(T )4
 (8.44)
 5 3
 H = T +T (8.45)

 Here when we use a notation like FFN(T3 ) we mean that the same FFN is applied
 in parallel to each of the N embedding vectors in the window. Similarly, each of the
 N tokens is normed in parallel in the LayerNorm. Crucially, the input and output
 dimensions of transformer blocks are matched so they can be stacked. Since each
 token xi at the input to the block is represented by an embedding of dimensionality
 [1 × d], that means the input X and output H are both of shape [N × d].

 Let’s talk about where the input X comes from. Given a sequence of N tokens (N is
 embedding the context length in tokens), the matrix X of shape [N × d] has an embedding for
 each word in the context. The transformer does this by separately computing two
 embeddings: an input token embedding, and an input positional embedding.
 A token embedding, introduced in Chapter 6, is a vector of dimension d that will
 be our initial representation for the input token. (As we pass vectors up through the
 transformer layers in the residual stream, this embedding representation will change
 and grow, incorporating context and playing a different role depending on the kind
 of language model we are building.) The set of initial embeddings are stored in the
 embedding matrix E, which has a row for each of the |V | tokens in the vocabulary.
 (Reminder that V here means the vocabulary of tokens, this V is not related to the
 value vector.) Thus each word is a row vector of d dimensions, and E has shape
 [|V | × d].
 Given an input token string like Thanks for all the we first convert the tokens
 into vocabulary indices (these were created when we first tokenized the input using
 BPE or SentencePiece). So the representation of thanks for all the might be w =
 [5, 4000, 10532, 2224]. Next we use indexing to select the corresponding rows from
 E, (row 5, row 4000, row 10532, row 2224).
 Another way to think about selecting token embeddings from the embedding
 matrix is to represent tokens as one-hot vectors of shape [1 × |V |], i.e., with one
 one-hot vector dimension for each word in the vocabulary. Recall that in a one-hot vector all the
 elements are 0 except one, the element whose dimension is the word’s index in the
 vocabulary, which has value 1. So if the word “thanks” has index 5 in the vocabulary,
 x5 = 1, and xi = 0 ∀i 6= 5, as shown here:
 [0 0 0 0 1 0 0 ... 0 0 0 0]
 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 ... ... |V|
 Multiplying by a one-hot vector that has only one non-zero element xi = 1 simply
 selects out the relevant row vector for word i, resulting in the embedding for word i,
 as depicted in Fig. 8.11.
 8.4 • T HE INPUT: EMBEDDINGS FOR TOKEN AND POSITION 15

 d

 5 |V| 5 d
 1 0000100…0000 ✕ E = 1

 matrix E with a one-hot vector with a 1 in index 5.

 We can extend this idea to represent the entire token sequence as a matrix of onehot vectors, one for each of the N positions in the transformer’s context window, as
 shown in Fig. 8.12.

 d
 |V| d
 0000100…0000
 0000000…0010
 1000000…0000 ✕ E =
 …
 N 0000100…0000
 N
 | V|

 These token embeddings are not position-dependent. To represent the position
 of each token in the sequence, we combine these token embeddings with positional
 positional
embeddings embeddings specific to each position in an input sequence.
 Where do we get these positional embeddings? The simplest method, called
 absolute
 position absolute position, is to start with randomly initialized embeddings corresponding
 to each possible input position up to some maximum length. For example, just as
 we have an embedding for the word fish, we’ll have an embedding for the position 3.
 As with word embeddings, these positional embeddings are learned along with other
 parameters during training. We can store them in a matrix Epos of shape [N × d].
 To produce an input embedding that captures positional information, we just
 add the word embedding for each input to its corresponding positional embedding.
 The individual token and position embeddings are both of size [1×d], so their sum is
 also [1×d], This new embedding serves as the input for further processing. Fig. 8.13
 shows the idea.

 Transformer Block

 X = Composite
 Embeddings
 (word + position)

 Word
 Janet

 back
 will

 the

 bill

 Embeddings
 Position

 Embeddings
 Janet will back the bill

 the token embedding to produce a new embedding of the same dimensionality.
16 C HAPTER 8 • T RANSFORMERS

 The final representation of the input, the matrix X, is an [N × d] matrix in which
 each row i is the representation of the ith token in the input, computed by adding
 E[id(i)]—the embedding of the id of the token that occurred at position i—, to P[i],
 the positional embedding of position i.
 A potential problem with the simple position embedding approach is that there
 will be plenty of training examples for the initial positions in our inputs and correspondingly fewer at the outer length limits. These latter embeddings may be poorly
 trained and may not generalize well during testing. An alternative is to choose a
 static function that maps integer inputs to real-valued vectors in a way that better
 handles sequences of arbitrary length. A combination of sine and cosine functions
 with differing frequencies was used in the original transformer work. Sinusoidal position embeddings may also help in capturing the inherent relationships among the
 positions, like the fact that position 4 in an input is more closely related to position
 5 than it is to position 17.
 A more complex style of positional embedding methods extend this idea of caprelative
 position turing relationships even further to directly represent relative position instead of
 absolute position, often implemented in the attention mechanism at each layer rather
 than being added once at the initial input.

 The last component of the transformer we must introduce is the language modeling
 language
 modeling head head. Here we are using the word head to mean the additional neural circuitry we
 head add on top of the basic transformer architecture when we apply pretrained transformer models to various tasks. The language modeling head is the circuitry we
 need to do language modeling.
 Recall that language models, from the simple n-gram models of Chapter 3 through
 the feedforward and RNN language models of Chapter 6 and Chapter 13, are word
 predictors. Given a context of words, they assign a probability to each possible next
 word. For example, if the preceding context is “Thanks for all the” and we want to
 know how likely the next word is “fish” we would compute:

 P(fish|Thanks for all the)

 Language models give us the ability to assign such a conditional probability to every
 possible next word, giving us a distribution over the entire vocabulary. The n-gram
 language models of Chapter 3 compute the probability of a word given counts of
 its occurrence with the n − 1 prior words. The context is thus of size n − 1. For
 transformer language models, the context is the size of the transformer’s context
 window, which can be quite large, like 32K tokens for large models (and much larger
 contexts of millions of words are possible with special long-context architectures).
 The job of the language modeling head is to take the output of the final transformer layer from the last token N and use it to predict the upcoming word at position N + 1. Fig. 8.14 shows how to accomplish this task, taking the output of the last
 token at the last layer (the d-dimensional output embedding of shape [1 × d]) and
 producing a probability distribution over words (from which we will choose one to
 generate).
 The first module in Fig. 8.14 is a linear layer, whose job is to project from the
 output hLN , which represents the output token embedding at position N from the final
 8.5 • T HE L ANGUAGE M ODELING H EAD 17

 y1 y2 … y|V| Word probabilities 1 x |V|

 Language Model Head Softmax over vocabulary V
 takes hLN and outputs a u1 u2 … u|V| Logits 1 x |V|
 distribution over vocabulary V
 Unembedding layer Unembedding layer d x |V|
 U = ET

 hL1 hL2 hLN 1xd
 Layer L
 Transformer
 Block
 …
 w1 w2 wN

embedding for token N from the last transformer layer (hLN ) to a probability distribution over words in the
vocabulary V .

 logit block L, (hence of shape [1 × d]) to the logit vector, or score vector, that will have a
 single score for each of the |V | possible words in the vocabulary V . The logit vector
 u is thus of dimensionality [1 × |V |].
 This linear layer can be learned, but more commonly we tie this matrix to (the
 weight tying transpose of) the embedding matrix E. Recall that in weight tying, we use the
 same weights for two different matrices in the model. Thus at the input stage of the
 transformer the embedding matrix (of shape [|V | × d]) is used to map from a one-hot
 vector over the vocabulary (of shape [1 × |V |]) to an embedding (of shape [1 × d]).
 And then in the language model head, ET , the transpose of the embedding matrix (of
 shape [d × |V |]) is used to map back from an embedding (shape [1 × d]) to a vector
 over the vocabulary (shape [1×|V |]). In the learning process, E will be optimized to
 be good at doing both of these mappings. We therefore sometimes call the transpose
 unembedding ET the unembedding layer because it is performing this reverse mapping.
 A softmax layer turns the logits u into the probabilities y over the vocabulary.

 u = hLN ET (8.46)
 y = softmax(u) (8.47)

 We can use these probabilities to do things like help assign a probability to a
 given text. But the most important usage is to generate text, which we do by sampling a word from these probabilities y. We might sample the highest probability
 word (‘greedy’ decoding), or use another of the sampling methods from Section ??
 or Section 8.6.
 In either case, whatever entry yk we choose from the probability vector y, we
 generate the word that has that index k.
 Fig. 8.15 shows the total stacked architecture for one token i. Note that the input
 to each transformer layer xi` is the same as the output from the preceding layer hi`−1 .
 A terminological note before we conclude: You will sometimes see a transformer used for this kind of unidirectional causal language model called a decoderdecoder-only only model. This is because this model constitutes roughly half of the encodermodel
 decoder model for transformers that we’ll see how to apply to machine translation
 in Chapter 12. (Confusingly, the original introduction of the transformer had an
 encoder-decoder architecture, and it was only later that the standard paradigm for
18 C HAPTER 8 • T RANSFORMERS

 Token probabilities y1 y2 … y|V| wi+1
 Sample token to
 softmax generate at position i+1
 Language
 Modeling
 Head logits u1 u2 … u|V|

 U

 hLi
 feedforward
 layer norm
 Layer L
 attention
 layer norm
 hL-1i = xLi
 …
 h2i = x3i
 feedforward
 layer norm
 Layer 2
 attention
 layer norm

 h1i = x2i
 feedforward
 layer norm
 Layer 1
 attention
 layer norm

 x1i
 + i
 Input
 Encoding E

 Input token wi

 and mapping from an input token wi to to a predicted next token wi+1 .

 causal language model was defined by using only the decoder part of this original
 architecture).

 The sampling methods we introduce below each have parameters that enable trading off two important factors in generation: quality and diversity. Methods that
 emphasize the most probable words tend to produce generations that are rated by
 people as more accurate, more coherent, and more factual, but also more boring
 and more repetitive. Methods that give a bit more weight to the middle-probability
 words tend to be more creative and more diverse, but less factual and more likely to
 be incoherent or otherwise low-quality.

 8.6.1 Top-k sampling
top-k sampling Top-k sampling is a simple generalization of greedy decoding. Instead of choosing
 the single most probable word to generate, we first truncate the distribution to the
 8.7 • T RAINING 19

 top k most likely words, renormalize to produce a legitimate probability distribution,
 and then randomly sample from within these k words according to their renormalized
 probabilities. More formally:
 1. Choose in advance a number of words k
 2. For each word in the vocabulary V , use the language model to compute the
 likelihood of this word given the context p(wt |w<t )
 3. Sort the words by their likelihood, and throw away any word that is not one of
 the top k most probable words.
 4. Renormalize the scores of the k words to be a legitimate probability distribution.
 5. Randomly sample a word from within these remaining k most-probable words
 according to its probability.
 When k = 1, top-k sampling is identical to greedy decoding. Setting k to a larger
 number than 1 leads us to sometimes select a word which is not necessarily the most
 probable, but is still probable enough, and whose choice results in generating more
 diverse but still high-enough-quality text.

 8.6.2 Nucleus or top-p sampling
 One problem with top-k sampling is that k is fixed, but the shape of the probability
 distribution over words differs in different contexts. If we set k = 10, sometimes
 the top 10 words will be very likely and include most of the probability mass, but
 other times the probability distribution will be flatter and the top 10 words will only
 include a small part of the probability mass.
top-p sampling An alternative, called top-p sampling or nucleus sampling (Holtzman et al.,
 2020), is to keep not the top k words, but the top p percent of the probability mass.
 The goal is the same; to truncate the distribution to remove the very unlikely words.
 But by measuring probability rather than the number of words, the hope is that the
 measure will be more robust in very different contexts, dynamically increasing and
 decreasing the pool of word candidates.
 Given a distribution P(wt |w<t ), we sort the distribution from most probable, and
 then the top-p vocabulary V (p) is the smallest set of words such that
 X
 P(w|w<t ) ≥ p. (8.48)
 w∈V (p)

 We described the training process for language models in the prior chapter. Recall that large language models are trained with cross-entropy loss, also called the
 negative log likelihood loss. At time t the cross-entropy loss is the negative log probability the model assigns to the next word in the training sequence, − log p(wt+1 ).
 Fig. 8.16 illustrates the general training approach. At each step, given all the
 preceding words, the final transformer layer produces an output distribution over the
 entire vocabulary. During training, the probability assigned to the correct word by
 the model is used to calculate the cross-entropy loss for each item in the sequence.
 The loss for a training sequence is the average cross-entropy loss over the entire
 sequence. The weights in the network are adjusted to minimize the average CE loss
 over the training sequence via gradient descent.
20 C HAPTER 8 • T RANSFORMERS

 Next token long and thanks for all …
 log yand … =
 <latexit sha1_base64="AovqpaL476UmJ1EU1xZPgDZ70tQ=">AAAB9nicbVDLSsNAFL2pr1pfURcu3AwWwY0lEakui25cVrAPaEqYTCbt0EkmzEzEEvIrbkTcKPgZ/oJ/Y9Jm09YDA4dzznDvPV7MmdKW9WtU1tY3Nreq27Wd3b39A/PwqKtEIgntEMGF7HtYUc4i2tFMc9qPJcWhx2nPm9wXfu+ZSsVE9KSnMR2GeBSxgBGsc8k1Ty4dLkZo6qZOiPVYhimO/CyruWbdalgzoFVil6QOJdqu+eP4giQhjTThWKmBbcV6mGKpGeE0qzmJojEmEzyi6WztDJ3nko8CIfMXaTRTF3I4VGoaenmy2E0te4X4nzdIdHA7TFkUJ5pGZD4oSDjSAhUdIJ9JSjSf5gQTyfINERljiYnOmypOt5cPXSXdq4bdbDQfr+utu7KEKpzCGVyADTfQggdoQwcIZPAGn/BlvBivxrvxMY9WjPLPMSzA+P4DPEiSHA==</latexit>

 log ythanks
 <latexit sha1_base64="q3ZgXDyG7qtkT7t8hT47RdlwYG4=">AAAB+XicbVDLSsNAFJ3UV62vWHe6GVsEN5bERXUlBUVcVrAPaEqYTCft0MlMmJkIIQT8AT/CTRE3Cv6Ev+DfmLTdtPXAwOGcM9x7jxcyqrRl/RqFtfWNza3idmlnd2//wDwst5WIJCYtLJiQXQ8pwignLU01I91QEhR4jHS88W3ud56JVFTwJx2HpB+gIac+xUhnkmseXzhMDGHsJk6A9EgGiR4hPlZpWnLNqlWzpoCrxJ6TauP0tXw3qdw0XfPHGQgcBYRrzJBSPdsKdT9BUlPMSFpyIkVChMdoSJLp5ik8y6QB9IXMHtdwqi7kUKBUHHhZMl9PLXu5+J/Xi7R/3U8oDyNNOJ4N8iMGtYB5DXBAJcGaxRlBWNJsQ4hHSCKss7Ly0+3lQ1dJ+7Jm12v1x6yDezBDEZyACjgHNrgCDfAAmqAFMHgBE/AJvozEeDPejY9ZtGDM/xyBBRjff79pldo=</latexit>

 Loss

 Language
 Modeling
 logits logits logits logits logits …
 Head U U U U U

 Stacked
 Transformer
 … … … … … …
 Blocks

 x1 x2 x3 x4 x5 …
 + 1 + 2 + 3 + 4 + 5
 Input
 Encoding E E E E E
 …

 Input tokens So long and thanks for

 With transformers, each training item can be processed in parallel since the output for each element in the sequence is computed separately.
 Large models are generally trained by filling the full context window (for example 4096 tokens for GPT4 or 8192 for Llama 3) with text. If documents are shorter
 than this, multiple documents are packed into the window with a special end-of-text
 token between them. The batch size for gradient descent is usually quite large (the
 largest GPT-3 model uses a batch size of 3.2 million tokens).

 Large language models are large. For example the Llama 3.1 405B Instruct model
 from Meta has 405 billion parameters (L=126 layers, a model dimensionality of
 d=16,384, A=128 attention heads) and was trained on 15.6 terabytes of text tokens
 (Llama Team, 2024), using a vocabulary of 128K tokens. So there is a lot of research
 on understanding how LLMs scale, and especially how to implement them given
 limited resources. In the next few sections we discuss how to think about scale (the
 concept of scaling laws), and important techniques for getting language models to
 work efficiently, such as the KV cache and parameter-efficient fine tuning.

 8.8.1 Scaling laws
 The performance of large language models has shown to be mainly determined by
 3 factors: model size (the number of parameters not counting embeddings), dataset
 size (the amount of training data), and the amount of compute used for training. That
 is, we can improve a model by adding parameters (adding more layers or having
 wider contexts or both), by training on more data, or by training for more iterations.
 The relationships between these factors and performance are known as scaling
 scaling laws laws. Roughly speaking, the performance of a large language model (the loss) scales
 8.8 • D EALING WITH S CALE 21

 as a power-law with each of these three properties of model training.
 For example, Kaplan et al. (2020) found the following three relationships for
 loss L as a function of the number of non-embedding parameters N, the dataset size
 D, and the compute budget C, for models training with limited parameters, dataset,
 or compute budget, if in each case the other two properties are held constant:

 Nc
  αN
 L(N) = (8.49)
 N
 Dc
   αD
 L(D) = (8.50)
 D
 Cc
  αC
 L(C) = (8.51)
 C

 The number of (non-embedding) parameters N can be roughly computed as follows (ignoring biases, and with d as the input and output dimensionality of the
 model, dattn as the self-attention layer size, and dff the size of the feedforward layer):

 N ≈ 2 d nlayer (2 dattn + dff )
 ≈ 12 nlayer d 2 (8.52)
 (assuming dattn = dff /4 = d)

 Thus GPT-3, with n = 96 layers and dimensionality d = 12288, has 12 × 96 ×
 122882 ≈ 175 billion parameters.
 The values of Nc , Dc , Cc , αN , αD , and αC depend on the exact transformer
 architecture, tokenization, and vocabulary size, so rather than all the precise values,
 scaling laws focus on the relationship with loss.4
 Scaling laws can be useful in deciding how to train a model to a particular performance, for example by looking at early in the training curve, or performance with
 smaller amounts of data, to predict what the loss would be if we were to add more
 data or increase model size. Other aspects of scaling laws can also tell us how much
 data we need to add when scaling up a model.

 8.8.2 KV Cache
 We saw in Fig. 8.10 and in Eq. 8.34 (repeated below) how the attention vector can
 be very efficiently computed in parallel for training, via two matrix multiplications:

 QK|
  
 A = softmax √ V (8.53)
 dk

 Unfortunately we can’t do quite the same efficient computation in inference as
 in training. That’s because at inference time, we iteratively generate the next tokens
 one at a time. For a new token that we have just generated, call it xi , we need to
 compute its query, key, and values by multiplying by WQ , WK , and WV respectively. But it would be a waste of computation time to recompute the key and value
 vectors for all the prior tokens x<i ; at prior steps we already computed these key
 and value vectors! So instead of recomputing these, whenever we compute the key
KV cache and value vectors we store them in memory in the KV cache, and then we can just
 grab them from the cache when we need them. Fig. 8.17 modifies Fig. 8.10 to show
22 C HAPTER 8 • T RANSFORMERS

 Q QKT V A
 KT v1

 x = x v2

 k1

 k2

 k3

 k4
 v3

 dk x N v4
 q4 q4•k1 q4•k2 q4•k3 q4•k4 a4

 1 x dk 1xN N x dv 1 x dv

 the vectors that can be stored in the cache rather than recomputed when computing the attention score for the 4th token.

 the computation that takes place for a single new token, showing which values we
 can take from the cache rather than recompute.

 8.8.3 Parameter Efficient Fine Tuning
 As we mentioned above, it’s very common to take a language model and give it more
 information about a new domain by finetuning it (continuing to train it to predict
 upcoming words) on some additional data.
 Fine-tuning can be very difficult with very large language models, because there
 are enormous numbers of parameters to train; each pass of batch gradient descent
 has to backpropagate through many many huge layers. This makes finetuning huge
 language models extremely expensive in processing power, in memory, and in time.
 For this reason, there are alternative methods that allow a model to be finetuned
 parameterwithout changing all the parameters. Such methods are called parameter-efficient
 efficient fine fine tuning or sometimes PEFT, because we efficiently select a subset of parameters
 tuning
 PEFT to update when finetuning. For example we freeze some of the parameters (don’t
 change them), and only update some particular subset of parameters.
 LoRA Here we describe one such model, called LoRA, for Low-Rank Adaptation. The
 intuition of LoRA is that transformers have many dense layers which perform matrix
 multiplication (for example the WQ , WK , WV , WO layers in the attention computation). Instead of updating these layers during finetuning, with LoRA we freeze these
 layers and instead update a low-rank approximation that has fewer parameters.
 Consider a matrix W of dimensionality [N × d] that needs to be updated during
 finetuning via gradient descent. Normally this matrix would get updates ∆W of
 dimensionality [N × d], for updating the N × d parameters after gradient descent. In
 LoRA, we freeze W and update instead a low-rank decomposition of W. We create
 two matrices A and B, where A has size [N ×r] and B has size [r ×d], and we choose
 r to be quite small, r << min(d, N). During finetuning we update A and B instead
 of W. That is, we replace W + ∆W with W + AB. Fig. 8.18 shows the intuition.
 For replacing the forward pass h = xW, the new forward pass is instead:

 h = xW + xAB (8.54)

 LoRA has a number of advantages. It dramatically reduces hardware requirements,
 since gradients don’t have to be calculated for most parameters. The weight updates
 can be simply added in to the pretrained weights, since AB is the same size as W).
 4 For the initial experiment in Kaplan et al. (2020) the precise values were αN = 0.076, Nc = 8.8 ×1013
 (parameters), αD = 0.095, Dc = 5.4 ×1013 (tokens), αC = 0.050, Cc = 3.1 ×108 (petaflop-days).
 8.9 • I NTERPRETING THE T RANSFORMER 23

 d
 h 1

 d
 × r B
 Pretrained
 Weights
 N N A
 W

 d r

 x 1
 d

 the updated AB.

 That means it doesn’t add any time during inference. And it also means it’s possible
 to build LoRA modules for different domains and just swap them in and out by
 adding them in or subtracting them from W.
 In its original version LoRA was applied just to the matrices in the attention
 computation (the WQ , WK , WV , and WO layers). Many variants of LoRA exist.

 How does a transformer-based language model manage to do so well at language
interpretability tasks? The subfield of interpretability, sometimes called mechanistic interpretability, focuses on ways to understand mechanistically what is going on inside the
 transformer. In the next two subsections we discuss two well-studied aspects of
 transformer interpretability.

 8.9.1 In-Context Learning and Induction Heads
 As a way of getting a model to do what we want, we can think of prompting as being
 fundamentally different than pretraining. Learning via pretraining means updating
 the model’s parameters by using gradient descent according to some loss function.
 But prompting with demonstrations can teach a model to do a new task. The model
 is learning something about the task from those demonstrations as it processes the
 prompt.
 Even without demonstrations, we can think of the process of prompting as a kind
 of learning. For example, the further a model gets in a prompt, the better it tends
 to get at predicting the upcoming tokens. The information in the context is helping
 give the model more predictive power.
 in-context
 learning The term in-context learning was first proposed by Brown et al. (2020) in their
 introduction of the GPT3 system, to refer to either of these kinds of learning that lan-
24 C HAPTER 8 • T RANSFORMERS

 guage models do from their prompts. In-context learning means language models
 learning to do new tasks, better predict tokens, or generally reduce their loss during the forward-pass at inference-time, without any gradient-based updates to the
 model’s parameters.
 How does in-context learning work? While we don’t know for sure, there are
induction heads some intriguing ideas. One hypothesis is based on the idea of induction heads
 (Elhage et al., 2021; Olsson et al., 2022). Induction heads are the name for a circuit,
 which is a kind of abstract component of a network. The induction head circuit
 is part of the attention computation in transformers, discovered by looking at mini
 language models with only 1-2 attention heads.
 The function of the induction head is to predict repeated sequences. For example
 if it sees the pattern AB...A in an input sequence, it predicts that B will follow,
 instantiating the pattern completion rule AB...A→ B. It does this by having a prefix
 matching component of the attention computation that, when looking at the current
 token A, searches back over the context to find a prior instance of A. If it finds one,
 the induction head has a copying mechanism that “copies” the token B that followed
 the earlier A, by increasing the probability the B will occur next. Fig. 8.19 shows an
 example.

 Figure
 In the sequence head
 “...vintage looking
 cars ... vintage”,atanvintage uses
 induction head the prefix
 identifies matching
 the initial mechanism
 occurrence of “vintage”,to
 find a prior
 attends to theinstance
 subsequentofword “cars” forand
 vintage, prefixthe copying
 matching, and mechanism
 predicts “cars” to predict
 as the next wordthathrough will
 cars the occur
 copying
 mechanism.
 again. Figure from Crosbie and Shutova (2022).

 determines each head’s independent output for the 4.2 Identifying Induction Heads
 Olsson et al. (2022) propose that a generalized fuzzy version of this pattern comcurrent token. To identify
 pletion rule, implementing a rule like A*B*...A→
 Leveraging this decomposition, Elhage et al. sure the ability B,induction
 where heads
 A* ≈within
 A and models,
 B* ≈ weB mea-
 (by
 of all attention heads to perform
 we mean
 ≈(2021) theyathey
 discovered arebehaviour
 distinct semantically
 in certainsimilar in some way), might be responsible
 prefix matching on random input sequences. We 4
 forattention
 in-context learning.
 heads, which Suggestive
 they named induction evidence for the
 heads. follow their hypothesis
 task-agnostic comes
 approach from Crosto computing preablating This
 bie andbehaviour
 Shutova emerges when who
 (2022), these heads
 showprocess
 that ablating induction
 fix matching headsbycauses
 scores outlined Bansal etin-context
 al. (2023).
 sequences of the form "[A] [B] ... [A] → ". In Weis argue that focusing solely on term
 prefix matching
 learning performance to decrease. Ablation originally a medical
 these heads, the QK circuit directs attention to- scores is sufficient for our analysis, as high premeaning
 the removal
 wards [B], whichofappears
 something. Wetheuse
 directly after it in NLP
 previous interpretability studies as a tool for
 fix matching cores specifically indicate induction
 testing
 occurrencecausal
 of theeffects; if we
 current token [A].knock out a hypothesized
 This behaviour heads, while less cause,
 relevantwe would
 heads tend toexpect
 show high the
 is termed
 effect prefix matching.
 to disappear. The OV
 Crosbie andcircuit subse- (2022)
 Shutova copyingablate induction
 capabilities (Bansalheads by first
 et al., 2023). We findgen-
 quently increases the output logit of the [B] token, erate a sequence of 50 random tokens, excluding
 ing attention heads that perform as induction heads on random input sequences, and
 termed copying. An overview of this echanism is the 4% most common and least common tokens.
 then
 shown zeroing
 in Figureout
 1. the output of these heads by setting certain terms of the output ma-
This sequence is repeated four times to form the
 trix WO to zero. Indeed they find that ablated
 inputmodels are The
 to the model. much worse
 prefix at in-context
 matching score is cal-
4 Methods
 learning: they have much worse performance at learning
 culated from
 by averaging the demonstrations
 attention values fromin the
 each
 prompts. token to the tokens that directly followed the same
 token in earlier repeats. The final prefix matching
 We utilise two recently developed open-source scores are averaged over five random sequences.
 8.9.2 Logit
 models, namely Lens 2 and InternLM2-20B
 Llama-3-8B The prefix matching scores for Llama-3-8B are
 (Cai et al., 2024), both of which are based on the shown in Figure 2. For IntermLM2-20B, we refer
 logit lens original Llama
 Another useful(Touvron et al., 2023a)
 interpretability the logit
 architectool, lens 8(Nostalgebraist,
 to Figure in Appendix A.1. Both 2020),
 modelsoffers
 exhibit a
 ture. These models feature grouped-query atten- heads with notably high prefix matching scores,
 way to visualize what the internal layers of the transformer might be representing.
 tion mechanisms (Ainslie et al., 2023) to enhance distributed across various layers. In the Llama-3-
The idea
 efficiency. is that we
 Llama-3-8B, take any
 comprises vector
 32 layers, eachfrom8Bany layer
 model, ~3% of theheads
 of the transformer
 have a prefixand, prematching
 tending that it is
 with 32 attention theand
 heads prefinal
 it uses aembedding,
 query group simply
 score of multiply by the unembedding
 it indicating
 layer
 size ofto4 get
 attention heads.
 logits, andIt compute
 has shown a superior
 softmaxcialisation
 to see the distribution
 in prefix matching, andover
 somewords that
 heads have
 performance compared to its predecessors, even high scores of up to 0.98.
 that vector might be
 the larger Llama-2 models.
 representing. This can be a useful window into the internal
 representations
 InternLM2-20B,ofeaturing
 the model. Since
 48 layers with the
 48 at-network wasn’t
 Ablations
 tention heads each, uses a query group size of 6 To investigate the significance of induction heads
 attention heads. We selected InternLM2-20B for for a specific ICL task, we conduct zero-ablations
 its exemplary performance on the Needle-in-the- of 1% and 3% of the heads with the highest prefix
 Haystack3 task, which assesses LLMs’ ability to matching scores. This ablation process involves
 retrieve a single critical piece of information em- masking the corresponding partition of the output
 bedded within a lengthy text. This mirrors the matrix, denoted as Woh in Eq. 1, by setting it to
 functionality of induction heads, which scan the zero. This effectively renders the heads inactive
 8.10 • S UMMARY 25

 representations function in this way, the logit lens doesn’t always work perfectly, but
 this can still be a useful trick to help us visualize the internal layers of a transformer.

 This chapter has introduced the transformer and its components for the language
 modeling task introduced in the previous chapter. Here’s a summary of the main
 points that we covered:
 • Transformers are non-recurrent networks based on multi-head attention, a
 kind of self-attention. A multi-head attention computation takes an input
 vector xi and maps it to an output ai by adding in vectors from prior tokens,
 weighted by how relevant they are for the processing of the current word.
 • A transformer block consists of a residual stream in which the input from
 the prior layer is passed up to the next layer, with the output of different components added to it. These components include a multi-head attention layer
 followed by a feedforward layer, each preceded by layer normalizations.
 Transformer blocks are stacked to make deeper and more powerful networks.
 • The input to a transformer is computed by adding an embedding (computed
 with an embedding matrix) to a positional encoding that represents the sequential position of the token in the window.
 • Language models can be built out of stacks of transformer blocks, with a
 language model head at the top, which applies an unembedding matrix to
 the output H of the top layer to generate the logits, which are then passed
 through a softmax to generate word probabilities.
 • Transformer-based language models have a wide context window (200K tokens or even more for very large models with special mechanisms) allowing
 them to draw on enormous amounts of context to predict upcoming words.
 • There are various computational tricks for making large language models
 more efficient, such as the KV cache and parameter-efficient finetuning.

Historical Notes
 The transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017) was developed drawing on two lines of prior
 research: self-attention and memory networks.
 Encoder-decoder attention, the idea of using a soft weighting over the encodings
 of input words to inform a generative decoder (see Chapter 12) was developed by
 Graves (2013) in the context of handwriting generation, and Bahdanau et al. (2015)
 for MT. This idea was extended to self-attention by dropping the need for separate
 encoding and decoding sequences and instead seeing attention as a way of weighting
 the tokens in collecting information passed from lower layers to higher layers (Ling
 et al., 2015; Cheng et al., 2016; Liu et al., 2016).
 Other aspects of the transformer, including the terminology of key, query, and
 value, came from memory networks, a mechanism for adding an external readwrite memory to networks, by using an embedding of a query to match keys rep-
26 C HAPTER 8 • T RANSFORMERS

 resenting content in an associative memory (Sukhbaatar et al., 2015; Weston et al.,
 2015; Graves et al., 2014).
 MORE HISTORY TBD IN NEXT DRAFT.
 Historical Notes 27

Ba, J. L., J. R. Kiros, and G. E. Hinton. 2016. Layer normalization. NeurIPS workshop.
Bahdanau, D., K. H. Cho, and Y. Bengio. 2015. Neural machine translation by jointly learning to align and translate.
 ICLR 2015.
Brown, T., B. Mann, N. Ryder, M. Subbiah, J. Kaplan,
 P. Dhariwal, A. Neelakantan, P. Shyam, G. Sastry,
 A. Askell, S. Agarwal, A. Herbert-Voss, G. Krueger,
 T. Henighan, R. Child, A. Ramesh, D. M. Ziegler, J. Wu,
 C. Winter, C. Hesse, M. Chen, E. Sigler, M. Litwin,
 S. Gray, B. Chess, J. Clark, C. Berner, S. McCandlish,
 A. Radford, I. Sutskever, and D. Amodei. 2020. Language
 models are few-shot learners. NeurIPS, volume 33.
Cheng, J., L. Dong, and M. Lapata. 2016. Long short-term
 memory-networks for machine reading. EMNLP.
Crosbie, J. and E. Shutova. 2022. Induction heads as an
 essential mechanism for pattern matching in in-context
 learning. ArXiv preprint.
Elhage, N., N. Nanda, C. Olsson, T. Henighan, N. Joseph,
 B. Mann, A. Askell, Y. Bai, A. Chen, T. Conerly, N. Das-
Sarma, D. Drain, D. Ganguli, Z. Hatfield-Dodds, D. Hernandez, A. Jones, J. Kernion, L. Lovitt, K. Ndousse,
 D. Amodei, T. Brown, J. Clark, J. Kaplan, S. McCandlish, and C. Olah. 2021. A mathematical framework for
 transformer circuits. White paper.
Graves, A. 2013. Generating sequences with recurrent neural
 networks. ArXiv.
Graves, A., G. Wayne, and I. Danihelka. 2014. Neural Turing machines. ArXiv.
Holtzman, A., J. Buys, L. Du, M. Forbes, and Y. Choi. 2020.
 The curious case of neural text degeneration. ICLR.
Kaplan, J., S. McCandlish, T. Henighan, T. B. Brown,
 B. Chess, R. Child, S. Gray, A. Radford, J. Wu, and
 D. Amodei. 2020. Scaling laws for neural language models. ArXiv preprint.
Ling, W., C. Dyer, A. W. Black, I. Trancoso, R. Fermandez,
 S. Amir, L. Marujo, and T. Luı́s. 2015. Finding function
 in form: Compositional character models for open vocabulary word representation. EMNLP.
Liu, Y., C. Sun, L. Lin, and X. Wang. 2016. Learning natural
 language inference using bidirectional LSTM model and
 inner-attention. ArXiv.
Llama Team. 2024. The llama 3 herd of models.
Nostalgebraist. 2020. Interpreting gpt: the logit lens. White
 paper.
Olsson, C., N. Elhage, N. Nanda, N. Joseph, N. DasSarma,
 T. Henighan, B. Mann, A. Askell, Y. Bai, A. Chen, et al.
 2022. In-context learning and induction heads. ArXiv
 preprint.
Sukhbaatar, S., A. Szlam, J. Weston, and R. Fergus. 2015.
 End-to-end memory networks. NeurIPS.
Uszkoreit, J. 2017. Transformer: A novel neural network architecture for language understanding. Google Research
 blog post, Thursday August 31, 2017.
Vaswani, A., N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit, L. Jones,
 A. N. Gomez, Ł. Kaiser, and I. Polosukhin. 2017. Attention is all you need. NeurIPS.
Weston, J., S. Chopra, and A. Bordes. 2015. Memory networks. ICLR 2015.
